# Full Awakened Awareness

## Ajahn Amaro

### 10-12-06

When there is full, awakened awareness, there is no identification with
the body or with conditioned factors of mind. The realization of Dhamma
is so complete that the life or death of the body is of as little
consequence as the turning of the Earth is to the Sun. The body and mind
are not-self, as is reiterated so often in the Buddhist scriptures, so
the heart remains serene with all of life's ups and downs, its many
psychological births and deaths, triumphs and failures, as well as the
"big death" of the body's ending. As St. Theresa of Avila put it when
expounding on this same theme, "We die before we die, so that when we
die, we don't die."

# Right Action Guided by Internal Experience

## Ajahn Amaro

### 12-10-08

*Sammā Kamanto*---right action---is an essential factor of the Noble
Eight-Fold Path. Often the Eight-Fold Path is summarized as *sīla*,
*samādhi*, and *paññā*, virtue, concentration, and wisdom. Right action
is then woven into the section on sīla, along with right speech and
right livelihood. As a result, when we are considering meditation, we
may focus on the samādhi section of the Path and forget the influence of
right action on our minds and states of consciousness throughout the
day, including our time meditating.

Often during the course of our lives in the monastery, because we have a
prescribed set of rules for conduct and a prescribed routine, we can
miss the effects that actions have on our minds, our states of
consciousness. It's something to be alert to. What we do and say during
the day have an effect, and that effect leads to either our spiritual
growth or our degeneration. Because action has such an effect, the
monastery environment is designed to maximize the wholesome qualities
and to restrain the unwholesome qualities.

But even within the framework of the precepts we live by and the routine
we have, it's good to be alert, recognizing the effect on the mind of
the actions we perform and the things we say during the course of the
day. It's good to consciously notice---when we've acted or spoken in an
unskillful way---how much that sticks in the mind. When we're sitting
down to meditate, we can see the difference. At the end of the day, when
there has been a very good standard of restraint and clarity, then
during the evening sitting we may notice, *Oh, look, there's nothing on
my mind. I'm not remembering anything cruel or selfish or coarse that I
said today. I'm not feeling the effects of having been agitated or
uncontrolled in my actions. Look at that, there's an absence of
unpleasant results*. We don't always notice that, but it is quite
helpful to our practice if we do.

It's easier to notice, at the end of the day, those times when we've had
some kind of contentious exchange or have used our speech in an
uncontrolled or obstructive way. On days like those, that's often what's
on the mind during the evening sitting. We sit down and
suddenly---*boom*---there it is, that regrettable conversation is
replaying itself. These unfortunate episodes arise immediately in the
mind and then, quite often, they can occupy the entire sitting. They can
keep popping up over and over again.

It's not necessary to create a sense of guilt, self-hatred or
self-criticism. But it is helpful when we think, *Oh, look---this was
the action, that is the result. Because this was done, there is that
effect. This is the cause, and that is the result.*That clear
observation of the causality of our experience is the doorway to wisdom,
concentration, and clarity. The more clearly we see the effects in
meditation of unskillful actions, the more clearly we realize we are
simply putting obstacles in our own way and sabotaging our own efforts.
Then we ask ourselves, *Why would I want to do this? Why on earth do I
want to mess up my own living space like this?*It's as if we're grabbing
handfuls of rocks and earth and fistfuls of poison oak and sprinkling
them all around the inside of our kuṭis. *Why would I want to do that?
What a strange, stupid thing to do*. This becomes clear to us.

When we reflect on wholesome and unwholesome mind states and recognize
their effects on how we act and speak, then that very recognition of
cause-and-effect guides us. It helps support our efforts to be more
restrained in the future. And it's not because there's a set of external
rules telling us that we should be like this, or because we fear an
authority figure who's going to scold us if we do something wrong. We
simply see for ourselves that right action supports the cultivation of a
pleasant, wholesome abiding, and it allows us to fulfill the purpose for
which we came to live at the monastery. Through right action we are
setting the conditions in favor of our purpose, steering our life in a
way that supports it. We're simply doing ourselves a favor, which brings
blessings into our lives.

It's not that we're never going to make mistakes or lose our way. But we
can cultivate that sense of attention and, by seeing how action and
speech affects the mind, we can let that recognition inform the way we
operate and speak. Then later, when we find ourselves being drawn into
an unskillful conversation or getting self-centered, aggressive, or
lazy, we can let that experience of recognizing cause-and-effect guide
us. *The last time I did that, it took me three days to get over it. It
seemed like a good idea at the time, but there was a lot of wreckage
left behind after acting in that way*. Because of having seen for
ourselves the painful effects of unskillful actions, we find ourselves
respecting and moving towards restraint, modesty, simplicity, and inner
quietude. This is really the best kind of training. Training in terms of
being obedient to an external force has its place. But being obedient to
and guided by our own internal experience---that's the kind of training
that brings well-grounded, long-lasting results.

# The Importance of Informal Meditation

## Ajahn Amaro

### 08-23-08

Our teacher Ajahn Chah strongly discouraged us from holding a perception
of meditation practice as different and apart from the activities of our
ordinary everyday lives. There can be a tendency to think that
meditation is what happens when we're walking up and down the meditation
path or in the Dhamma hall when we have our legs crossed and our eyes
closed*---*that the rest is merely "the other stuff" we need to take
care of so we can do "the real thing" of meditation. But Ajahn Chah was
very keen to point out that we're capable of suffering in all modes of
our lives, whether we're sitting on a cushion with our eyes closed,
sitting in a classroom, working in the kitchen, driving down the
freeway, or chatting with our friends. We can make difficulties for
ourselves and experience happiness and unhappiness in every aspect of
our lives. So it's important to bring all those different aspects of our
lives into the scope of meditation.

Rather than thinking that meditation equals the activities in the hall
or the walking path, it's more skillful to think in terms of "formal"
and "informal" practice. When we sit with our eyes closed and legs
crossed, that's formal practice. When working around the monastery and
taking time with each other, this is the same practice, but in an
informal mode. The informal practice is sometimes more challenging than
that of trying to be mindful when everything is still, quiet, and highly
controlled while we sit on our meditation cushions. So while we go about
the various work tasks this morning, we can bring attention and
mindfulness to them.

We can notice the different moods we're feeling. Are they exciting?
*This is great. This is so wonderful!* Or are we thinking, *Oh no,
another thing for me to fail at?* Maybe there's a feeling of pride. *My
lines are straighter than anybody else's. Just look at these lines I
painted!* The mind that creates problems can be very active. But with
practice we're able to see through whatever state of mind happens to be
in play.

We can watch the flow of moods, feelings, and thoughts as they go
through the mind. We're not suppressing them or feeling that we
shouldn't be experiencing these kinds of thoughts or attitudes, but
neither are we buying into or being caught up in them. Instead, we're
simply seeing that this is how the mind works. When things go well,
we're happy. When things go badly, we're unhappy. That's just the way it
is. We are recognizing that this is simply a flow of feeling and
perception we're engaged in, noticing for example the different changes
of the day. When we start the work period, it's nice, cool and, bright.
*Ah, this is so lovely. What a beautiful place.* Then, when the
temperature starts to pick up later in the morning, we might think, *Oh,
it's really hot. It's only 10 o'clock, and I'm dying on my feet here.*
We notice how our attitudes changed with the changing conditions. *Oh,
how interesting. When it was cool, I felt happy. When it was hot, I felt
oppressed. One is a feeling of comfort, the other is a feeling of
discomfort.* We can see these as nothing more than different impressions
and moods that come and go through the mind. We don't need to make a
problem out of them.

By doing this, We're not negating anything, not thinking we shouldn't be
feeling uncomfortable. We're merely seeing, *When it's like this I'm
happy; when it's like that then I'm unhappy.* We see how fickle the mind
can be, how easily we can get caught up in perceptions and moods. And we
simply bring mindfulness to that. The mind that's fully attentive to the
present moment sees how easily we get caught up, and in that seeing
there's a coolness of heart. There's an easefulness in the attitude. We
find ourselves more easily able to go with the ups and downs of praise
and criticism, success and failure, and with all the mundane, ordinary
experiences that flow through the day.

Of course, applying this kind of attention and attitude isn't only for
the morning work period, but for the entire course of the day: when the
work period finishes, when we gather for the mealtime, after the meal is
finished, when the dishes are done, and throughout our open time in the
afternoon. We try to keep bringing our attention and the reflective
attitude of mind to the flow of mood and perception. This is what's
meant by "mindfulness of every day life." It's as much a part of the
meditation as is the formal, quiet sitting---perhaps even more so. The
habit is to easily get caught up in the different conversations we're
having or in the work we're engaged in so that we don't notice what's
going on inside us. We're so busy and interested in active and external
things. If we first apply a bit of attention to how we're feeling, and
attend a bit more closely to our attitude, this will help us find and
retain a quality of balance and easefulness. We have the potential to be
interested in what we are attending to, but it takes some effort to draw
the attention inward.

So these are some of the ways we learn to change the lens of our
perceptions with regard to formal and informal meditation. Eventually,
we may come to understand that meditation is an all-day and sometimes
all-night activity. The more we are able to bring mindfulness and
attention into every aspect of our lives, the more opportunities there
are for wisdom and understanding to arise.

# Recollecting Our Goodness

## Ajahn Amaro

### 12-17-08

When we're engaged in a lot of activity, we can become so focused on the
details of what we're doing that we forget there's an element of
generosity and goodness in our actions. When Ajahn Sumedho was a young
monk, Ajahn Chah recommended that he recollect his good qualities. He
couldn't understand what Ajahn Chah was talking about because his mind
was quite busy and filled up with negative thoughts and emotional
habits. He thought he was basically a selfish, nasty, horrible person
and an embarrassment to the robes.

Luang Por told him, "If you're such a bad person and really evil you
wouldn't want to live with Buddhist monks. We would be the last people
you would want to spend time with. If you're so off the mark and if your
mind is so given to unwholesomeness, you wouldn't want to be around
people who are honest, refrain from stealing, refrain from consuming
intoxicants, people who don't behave in unruly ways. The last thing
you'd want to do is be around virtuous people." When Luang Por Chah said
this to him, he was quite startled by it. He thought to himself, You
know that's true. I can easily forget that I'm living in a Buddhist
monastery with Buddhist monks. There must be some reason why I'm doing
this.

We can become quite focused on our faults, wrongdoings, and the things
we said that were less than generous, friendly, helpful, or patient.
Even after someone's asked us for advice, what we think about later is
how much better it would have been to have said this or that. Oh gee, I
really didn't get that right. The attention goes to all our
shortcomings, failures, and weaknesses, and we obsess on those
qualities.

That's how it was for Ajahn Sumedho. So when Luang Por Chah suggested,
"Why don't you recollect all of your good qualities?" there was no
pigeonhole for him to put them in. At that time any good quality he had,
he saw as inflated, egotistical, proud, or conceited. But Luang Por Chah
said, "No. This is cāgānussati, recollecting your goodness, recollecting
your own generosity. It's a completely normal concept." Now, since we've
had the good fortune to hear Laung Por Chah's advice to Ajahn Sumedho,
it would behoove us to put that advice into practice for ourselves.

One way for us to do that is to recollect all the good effort we're
making in looking after the kitchen, providing food, looking after the
construction projects, the kuṭis, the buildings, or the micro-hydro
project we're setting up. These are acts of generosity and kindness, of
putting forth effort and putting forth our time to help other people.
Many people have helped with the construction of the kuṭi down by the
Bhikkhu Commons. Of those people, how many are actually going to live in
it? Probably a very small proportion. The effort that we make is not
simply in the single task we do, but also in the wholesomeness and
goodness it supports---the kusala kamma it supports. By providing this
dwelling, this food, these Dhamma talks, we bring enormous blessings
into our lives.

Take Tan Thitapañño, for instance. He's wrestling with the intricacies
of the Expression Engine software and the obstructive passwords that
won't let him use the program. When doing such hard work, it can be easy
to forget about the fact that there are people all over the planet who
delight in what this work accomplishes, *Oh look, a new Dhamma talk on
the Abhayagiri website. How marvelous! This is fantastic!*This isn't
simply about trying to cheer ourselves up or look on the bright side.
This really is the bright side. Earlier in the year a fellow came to
Abhayagiri from Liverpool, England. He was so happy to be here. He
didn't even stay for a full day. He happened to be in the country on
holiday and took a chance to visit us. He said, "We have this little
meditation group in Liverpool and we listen to Abhayagiri talks all the
time. It's so great to be here." He was bubbling with happiness. We can
forget that our lives are connected with little groups of people like
that all over the planet. In our small efforts to keep the bodies fed,
to keep the shelters workable, to provide Dhamma talks on the website,
to offer publications, to pay the bills---every little piece is bringing
goodness into the world. That's kusala kamma, wholesome action.

It's not indulgence, egotism, or pride to be reflecting on that
goodness. The Buddha himself encourages cāgānussati, recollecting our
generosity, because that brightens and brings joy to the mind. We can
take some time to recollect all the efforts that we're making on the
practical front as well as on the bhāvanā, the meditation. The word
anumodanā is rejoicing in the goodness that has been done. The cynical
mind says, Yeah, well, that's one thing. But I've really got some
serious problems. Basically I'm just a defiled mess. I really am! We
need to listen to that voice with compassion, but at the same time, we
don't want to let it run our lives. So we listen, and then gently park
it to one side. We can reflect, Even if I'm filled with utterly ghastly
defilements, still there are things I've done that have helped people.
That's an undeniable fact. There's some goodness or brightness that I've
brought into the lives of others. My effort to be a little bit more
patient has benefited other beings. How wonderful! By letting that
brightness inform our lives, we can be encouraged and gladdened by it.

# The Path of Non-Contention

## Ajahn Amaro

### 09-04-08

Often when we practice loving-kindness, *mettā,* it involves an active
well-wishing to all beings, such as when we repeat the phrases, "May you
be happy, may they be happy, may all beings be happy, healthy, safe, at
ease," and so forth. Certainly that's an important part of
loving-kindness meditation. But in a more essential, practical way, the
quality of mettā is not only a well-wishing toward other beings; it also
has to do with how we relate to our own mind states and the way we
handle the different moods, feelings, and perceptions that arise within
us. If we are repeating those mettā phrases and cultivating those
sentiments toward external beings, but yet internally relating to our
own mind states in a semi-conscious or unconscious, reactive way, then
all of those noble sentiments and qualities we direct outwards don't
have much fuel; they don't have much of a foundation. To make the
practices of mettā meditation really fruitful and genuinely relevant and
effective, there needs to be both the external element and the internal
element---relating with loving-kindness toward our own mind states,
moods, bodies, thoughts, and feelings.

When there's an irritation, an impatience arising, a sense of things
having shortcomings, or when we feel ourselves to be imperfect or not
beautiful in some way, then it's easy for us to criticize and blame
ourselves. We can quickly get upset with a mind that won't stop thinking
or has stray thoughts and unwanted memories, ideas, fears, feelings,
desires, and dislikes. Ajahn Sumedho addresses all these tendencies by
expressing the essential attitude of loving-kindness as, "Not dwelling
in aversion." Rather than expecting to be affirmatively affectionate
toward our bodies, thoughts, and feelings, it's merely a sense of not
finding fault with them, not dwelling in aversion. That much is doable.

To establish the attitude of loving-kindness---the genuine heart of
mettā*---*is to establish within ourselves a heart of non-contention, a
heart which is accepting and accommodating of all mind states. This
doesn't mean to say that we are approving of every thought we have, or
that all our feelings of selfishness, violence, aggression, jealousy,
and fear are beautiful, wonderful---adornments for the world. We're not
trying to pretend or allow ourselves to get lost in delusion, confusing
the skillful and unskillful. Instead we're simply trying to recognize
that everything belongs, whether it's a noble and wholesome thought, or
a selfish, fearful, jealous, or greedy thought. They all belong. They're
all attributes of nature. When we cultivate this quality of
non-contention and acceptance toward all our inner qualities---feelings,
thoughts, perceptions, memories, ideas, and fantasies---then the heart
is not divided, and there's unity, a unification of the heart.

And without this fundamental unity of mettā in our hearts---this
fundamental welcoming inclination and recognition that our internal
attributes, good or bad, are all aspects of the natural order---then
it's impossible to have a genuine, substantial attitude of
loving-kindness toward others, because the heart is divided.

So we can take some time to pursue and explore these themes and to
reflect on them, seeing throughout the course of the day how often the
mind wants to contend against our own bodies and their limitations, our
feelings and thoughts, and the world around us. We can take it all so
personally. While simply digging a hole in the ground we might think,
*That rock is determined to get in my way!*But mettā is the heart of
non-contention. We can learn how to work with the world so that
regardless of how obstructive things may seem to be, how unwanted and
unbidden, we can recognize that there's no need to start a fight or
contend against the world---it's up to us.

When this recognition takes hold, we can see that there is always a path
to working with the way things are, a path that leads us toward greater
clarity and peacefulness. And all of this is based fully upon our
cultivating an attitude of non-contention, of basic loving-kindness.

# Escaping the Infinite Rut

## Ajahn Amaro

### 08-26-08

We begin another day, reflecting on the tasks that we all have, the
lists of things to do, the never-ending need to attend to the kitchen,
the various work projects, guest-monk duties, construction, and so
forth. There's a sense of continuity, of things carrying on from where
we were before, going on and on. Ajahn Chah once came up with a
wonderful simile: "*Saṁsāra* is like the ruts left behind the wheels of
a cart. As the wheels turn, the trail that's left behind them goes on
and on." There's a sense of repetition, a continuous extension through
time. But the wheel itself is very stable, it simply pivots around its
axle. Even though the wheel is finite in length, it leaves an infinite
trail behind it.

Often we can focus on the infinite trail of the things we've done or
need to do. We get caught up by the sense of past and future, endlessly
stretching out behind and before us. But the essential aspect is that
one point where the wheel meets the ground. If we establish a quality of
real attention, then that's all there is. It's simply this one moment as
the edge of the wheel meets the ground, this one particular space of
experience, this place where we know the qualities of sight, sound,
smell, taste, touch, memory, and planning. It all happens here, in this
moment, in the space of this mind. *Right now, I'm sitting here,
listening to these words of the Ajahn, having tea in silence, the weight
of the body on the ground, feelings of coolness, warmth, tiredness.*
It's all happening here in the space of our awareness. This is the wheel
meeting the ground. There's a quality of great simplicity, stillness,
and stability to this.

So even though there's a dynamism, a flow of experience, and perceptions
come and go, there's also a quality of stillness. Luang Por Chah phrased
it well: "It's like still, flowing water." The mind that is aware and
knows is still, but the perceptions, thoughts, feelings, memories,
ideas, and plans have a quality of flowing, of continually and
unrelentingly moving. It's so easy for us to be caught up in the
urgencies of what's gone before or what we have to do, and then to
create a sense of self around that in the present moment. It's important
to question this process. When the urgencies of the mind come up*---I
did this, and I have to do that, and I need to get this done, and
so-and-so is going to call, I have to, I have to---*it's good to get out
of the rut, as it were, to stop obsessing on the "have done's" and the
"have to's," and question the feeling of urgency, obligation, and
entanglement with past and future. We can ask ourselves, *Is this
endless trail of doing and being done the whole story? Is this the
only way to perceive things?* In this way, we can challenge our
presumptuous habits of judging the past, judging the future, and judging
the present. *Is that so? Is that really the case? Is that the whole
story? Oh, it's good.---Is that so? Oh, it's terrible.---Really? Is
that so?*

Practicing the Dhamma doesn't take much. It doesn't take a lot of
complicated activity, but it does take application. It takes
remembrance, recollection, and mindfulness---*sati*. The word sati means
remembering to pay attention. If we don't remember, if we don't bring
attention to the practice, then that shift of perspective---escaping the
rut of past and future---doesn't happen. But if we do remember, then
we're able to bring to mind the quality of recollection. *What's the
hurry? Where do I think I'm going? Oh, is that so? This is great; this
is terrible. Is that really so?* It only takes the tiniest suggestion,
the briefest recollection, to catalyze that realization in the heart:
*Of course, how did I believe that was the whole story? Oh right, it's
just a judgment. It's merely a perception. It's only a plan.*

# Death: A Cause for Brightness

## Ajahn Amaro

### 11-16-08

There is a skillful and beautiful Buddhist tradition for families and
friends of someone who has passed away. The family members and friends
come to the monastery and make offerings that support the monastic
community. They receive *puñña*, merit from these offerings, and they
dedicate that merit to the deceased in whatever state of being he or she
may have moved on to. In countries like Thailand, Sri Lanka and for
Buddhists who live in the West, there are certain occasions when family
and friends come to make these offerings: Some short period of time
after the death, then perhaps six months after the death, and then the
year anniversary of the person's passing away.

In the chanting that is done on those occasions, we don't recite versus
like, "Don't worry, he's gone off to be with the *devas* forever. The
Lord is looking after him and he'll be happy up in heaven with the
bunnies and the blackberries." Rather, we chant in a more reflective
way, in terms of the wholesome, unwholesome, and neutral dhammas, the
internal and external dhammas, which comprise the different mind states
and qualities of experience. Also, for those left behind, there are
recollections such as, "All that arises passes away. Whatever comes into
being disintegrates, and in it's passing there is peace." They're not
deliberately consoling on an emotional level, but very realistic. "Yes,
life came to be, and now it's ended. It's dissolved." This acknowledges
the sadness when someone close to us dies, without wallowing in that
sadness. At the same time, we don't suppress it, trying to sugar over
everything by thinking, *She's gone to a better place*. Well, maybe she
has or maybe she hasn't.

In the Buddhist tradition there's a great deal of realism around the
process of death, and it's important for us all to cultivate this
quality of realism. What we know is that a life came into being and now
it's ended. That much we can be absolutely sure of. There's a natural
feeling of loss and sadness, a sense that the person was around, a
friend, close to us, but now gone. Even the Buddha experienced the loss
of those close to him. There's a famous passage that takes place after
the Buddha's two chief disciples, Sāriputta and Mahamoggallāna, had
passed away. The Buddha says to the gathered Saṅgha, "The assembly seems
empty now that Sāriputta and Mahamoggallāna are no longer here." So even
a fully enlightened being like the Buddha can know and sense the loss of
friends and companions. That's only natural and to be expected. It's
realistic.

The customs of gathering together, taking precepts, making offerings,
dedicating the merit to benefit an individual, are ways of taking that
feeling of sadness and loss on the occasion of a person's death and
uniting it with an act which is intrinsically wholesome, a brightening
act of generosity and kindness. Acts of generosity and dedicating merit
bring happiness, brightness, and invigoration to the mind and the heart;
over time, a succession of gathering, making offerings, and creating
wholesome *kamma* in relationship to that person, slowly transforms the
occasion of their death from being something associated with an
experience of loss and absence into something that is much more a cause
for brightness and happiness to arise.

# Stepping Into the Rain

## Ajahn Amaro

### 11-06-09

When the weather turns wet and gray like this, the world is a bit less
inviting outside, and it's easy to follow the natural instinct to seek
shelter and find a cozy spot. We might find ourselves hanging around in
the kitchen, the library, or the monks' office. It starts off with
waiting for the rain to ease off, then an hour goes by, then two hours.
We can end up spending hours doing a bit of unnecessary emails or
thinking, *Well, maybe I'll make that phone call, maybe I'll take a look
at this or that website.* The whole afternoon goes by with us chatting
away with each other, waiting for the rain or the mood to change. This
is a good way to waste time.

For the monastics here who have dwellings off in the forest, as well as
for the people who are staying here as guests, it's good to recall the
basic principle that we have of not gravitating towards the communal
cozy spot or a place where there are good chatting opportunities. Once
the meal is finished and the washing-up is done, unless we have some
urgent or significant business that requires our attention in the
afternoon, we should pack up our things and go back to our dwellings.

It takes a certain resolution to walk out into a wet, gray afternoon,
but once we are back in our dwellings, we find that solitude is the most
delightful and helpful of companions. It takes an effort to turn and
walk towards that. As the winter season is setting in and it's gray,
misty, wet, cool weather, I strongly encourage people to refrain from
huddling in that cozy spot looking for human company and cups of tea,
and to instead step out into it. Go back to your dwellings. Spend time
alone. Develop the path and turn your efforts toward the realization of
Nibbāna. This is what we're here for.

The alternative to doing that is always available to us---the particular
conversation we're interested in, this nice, cozy spot to settle
in---the comfortable alternative. If we simply default to what's
comfortable, what's interesting, the flow of a casual contact, hearing
the news, looking for something to do, being engaged in
something---anything---then we're really wasting our time. It's not
helpful. It doesn't conduce to insight, concentration, or
liberation---which is the purpose of this place and why this community
exists.

We're not here to exchange information, contact others, or plan menus.
Of course, these things have their place. They're all part of the
everyday process of helping with the construction and maintenance of the
buildings and with the cooking of food. But all these necessary tasks
and all the extraneous little bits and pieces that demand our attention
are not the purpose of our lives here. Those tasks and duties are merely
the means by which we're fed and sheltered, supplying us with the
requisites. Our lives here are for the purpose of developing the path
and realizing Dhamma.

As the season changes and it becomes cool and damp, don't be blind to
the influence the weather exerts over our minds. Take the opportunity to
seek solitude, non-engagement, seclusion. These are the elements of the
path that conduce to realization. These are some of the qualities that
benefit and support our decision to live in this place, shaving our
heads, putting on robes, keeping the precepts, following the routines
and disciplines. And if we want to fulfill the true purpose for which we
have come here---to realize the Dhamma---then we need to take the
initiative, we need to back up our commitment with actions that match
this greatest of all aspirations.

# Noticing When Heat Arises

## Ajahn Amaro

### 12-08-08

It often strikes me how the Fire Sermon is the shortest of the three
cardinal discourses of the Buddha, taking less than fifteen minutes to
chant. Yet during the course of the Buddha's teaching it, a thousand
*bhikkhus* became *Arahants*. In the Pāḷi Canon that's the largest
number of people who were completely liberated during the course of
listening to a single Dhamma talk. It's a powerful teaching, although it
can seem unremarkable in certain ways.

In the sutta, the Buddha goes through a list explaining how all of the
aspects of the senses are burning with greed, hatred, and delusion. The
eye, eye consciousness, eye contact, the feeling that arises with eye
contact, visual objects, everything to do with the process of
vision---and the same with the processes of hearing, smelling, tasting,
touching, and mental activities---they're all burning with passion,
aversion, and delusion. He then says, "*Evaṁ passaṁ bhikkhave sutva
ariyasāvako cakkusmim'pi nibindati---*Seeing thus, the wise, noble
disciple becomes dispassionate toward the eye, toward visual objects,
toward eye consciousness, toward eye contact, and the feeling that
arises with eye contact," and so on through the remaining five senses.

It's extraordinarily simple and direct. First, seeing that the senses
are on fire; second, recognizing that they're on fire, agitated, heated;
and then third, responding with coolness, *nibbindati*, dispassion.
*Nibbidā*is related to *Nibbāna,* "coolness"---there's a cooling in
relationship to the senses. And with that cooling down, that dispassion,
the hearts of those thousand bhikkhus were liberated. It's
extraordinarily simple. In the sutta, it almost seems as if nothing has
happened, as if very little instruction was given. But like many other
Buddhist teachings, particularly in the Pāḷi tradition, if we blink, we
miss it. The teachings can be quite subtle. They're not very
demonstrative or highly elaborate. This particular teaching is like
that. So we can easily miss the key piece: having the mindfulness to
recognize---to recognize the quality of burning, to recognize that
things are agitated and heated, to recognize the friction around what we
see, smell, taste, hear, touch, and think.

During the course of the day, it's helpful to bring mindfulness to
recognizing that the quality of friction, tension---what the Buddha
calls heat, *ādhitaṁ,*burning. The feeling can be one of ownership
regarding some tool, the interest in a particular task, or the
irritation with an exceptionally obstructive piece of rock that won't
move out of the way. Whatever it might be---some computer program or
printer that won't obey---whether aversion, delusion, or passion, it can
be extremely subtle and thus hard to recognize. It can also be obvious,
gross, and clearly visible---but even so, there's no guarantee we'll
recognize it. Recognition requires mindfulness.

As we bring mindfulness to the course of our days, we can observe the
sense world and how we respond to what we see, hear, smell, taste,
touch, and think---the mental realms of moods, memories, ideas, and
plans. We can notice when that heat arises. We notice the heat of
*rāga*, of passion, wanting, and desiring; the heat of *dosa*, of
aversion, being irritated, upset, obstructed; the heat of *moha*,
delusion, caught up in reactions, opinions, assumptions, projections,
and other deluded states. These are all aspects of heat in the context
of this teaching.

By bringing that quality of mindfulness---evaṁ passaṁ, seeing
thus---we're able to recognize that feeling of ownership, for example.
We can recognize the heat that the mind generates out of simple things.
*Oh look, I'm getting upset with this machine, I'm getting excited about
this plan I have, I'm claiming this painting project as mine*. A task we
didn't even know existed before it was assigned to us, suddenly becomes
"mine." *I hope no one sees that awful wood cut I made. "Look, that
cut's not square and we all know who did it!" That would be so
embarrassing.* By owning something, it can become our great achievement
or our terrible crime---the heat of pride or the heat of shame. So
again, "Evaṁ passaṁ bhikkhave--- the wise, noble disciple, seeing thus,
becomes dispassionate."

We can see how the mind creates these stupid, absurd reactions and
projections about the world, and at the same time, what an amazing,
wonderful capacity we have to cool down, let go, and not create heat
around these things. The wise, noble disciple becomes dispassionate
toward the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. Even though that's a
subtle teaching in some ways, it's also incredibly essential and
helpful. When we take the opportunity to cool down, to let the fire go
out, then, lo and behold, life becomes much easier, more pleasant, and
open. There's less heat, friction, and abrasion in our world.

# Uncertainty: The Spillway for the Mind

## Ajahn Amaro

### 11-10-08

With our friend Jay's health in such a precarious condition, this is a
good time to reflect on uncertainty. Ajahn Karuṇadhammo was saying, "The
doctors and nurses keep telling me that Jay can't last much longer. But
I've seen so many times where, against all reason and medical
possibilities, people continue to survive for a long time." This simple
recollection can be helpful. We don't know how much longer Jay will be
with us. Similarly, with the work scene, we don't know where the water
tank leak is or even if there is a leak. We don't know if all the
different work crews will get where they're supposed to this morning. We
don't know if Jim will be attacked by fronds of poison oak. *We don't
know*.

Throughout the course of any day, there are thousands of different
situations either on the grand scale, like someone's life ending, or on
the minuscule level---*Where have I left that hammer? What am I going to
make to go with the broccoli? Whose driving the truck up the mountain?*
We don't know. Instead of feeling frustrated because we're anxious and
without a plan, we simply can recognize, *I don't know where that tools
is, what to make with the broccoli, or whose driving. I don't know
what's going to happen next or if this is going to work. I don't know.*
We are bringing that quality of not knowing into our attention, rather
than trying to get some information so we *can* know, or feeling
frustrated or anxious because we don't have a plan or haven't figured
out a particular problem. When we reflect on not knowing, we are letting
go of our incessant need to ameliorate uncertainty---that refuge we
usually take in making sure that everything has a plan, an answer, or
some worldly solution.

Ajahn Chah would often say that this reflection on uncertainty is the
flag or emblem of the Noble Ones. He'd also say it's like a spillway for
a dam. When we build a dam, we need to have a spillway to relieve the
pressure and divert the excess water. Ajahn Chah would say, "Uncertainty
is the spillway for the mind." That's what relieves the pressure in our
lives and in our experience of the world.

So remember: It's uncertain, we don't know. When the mind makes a
judgment, calling this good or bad, right or wrong, we can reflect, *Is
it really a good thing? Don't know. Is it a bad thing? Don't know.* When
we cultivate that reflection on uncertainty from a place of wisdom
rather than from a place of self-view and anxiety, it can serve as a
spillway that relieves the pressure. Right there we can feel the relief
in the heart. Often we think, *Oh, this is going to be great, now I'll
be happy, everything is going to work out.* When thoughts like that
arise, we need to follow them up with wisdom, *How presumptuous to
believe I could know that. Of course, I don't know.* By frequently
reflecting in this way, we can learn to stop looking for certainty in
that which is intrinsically uncertain. What a relief.

As the day proceeds and we go about our work tasks, bear in mind that
*we don't know*. Has Jay passed away? Is he still alive? Is he still
breathing? *Don't know.* Whether it's concerning Jay or concerning the
tasks at hand, notice how the quality of the mind depends on whether or
not we're seeing uncertainty in relation to whatever judgment or
activity is taking place. When we see uncertainty clearly---the
uncertain nature of our lives---we directly experience the qualities of
relief and ease.

# Choosing Contention or Contentment

## Ajahn Amaro

### 12-22-08

On the winter solstice I led a daylong retreat at Spirit Rock with the
theme, "Maximum Darkness." We investigated the experiences of death,
loss, and sadness. It was a suitably dingy, gray, wet day, appropriate
to that dolorous subject. For many years, one of the exercises I used in
my meditation---and a theme I had others use on this daylong
retreat---was to imagine the current sitting I was doing to be the last
minutes of my life. When we did this together for the day, I didn't let
the others know how long the sitting was going to be---ten minutes,
twenty minutes, half an hour---so that we could really focus on each
breath, each moment, as if it were the last moment of our lives.

I encouraged the participants to reflect: *If this truly was the last
few minutes of my life, then what happens to my priority list?* If we
take seriously that the bell is the last moment, then consider what's
important and see what comes up in the mind with all of those things to
do, the anxieties about going to the dentist, and so on. Just reflect on
that, *How do I relate to the things I've left half done, the things I'm
so proud of, the things I regret?*

I've found this theme very useful, and for years when I was at Chithurst
Monastery I would make it a daily practice. Luang Por Sumedho would
always be the one ringing the bell at the end of the sittings, and at
the beginning I would imagine,*Okay, this is the last forty-five minutes
or last hour of my life. What will my mind be dwelling on when the bell
is rung? Can I drop it and be ready to go by the time the sound of the
ringing fades?* It's often quite shocking, the kind of things that the
mind is obsessed about or focused on. So we can ask ourselves, *Would I
really want to be thinking of this or dwelling on that at the time of
death?* That reflection then allows us to develop the capacity to drop
things, to let go.

One woman at the retreat saw a dichotomy in her mind, she saw a certain
choice. The choice was between contention and contentment. What took
shape in her mind was a clear distinction between being "content
with" the way things are, or "contending against" the way things are. I
thought it was quite insightful and interesting how her mind had
produced that way of formulating the dichotomy. She authentically
summarized the choice we all have at any moment during the day. Working
out in the cold with the rain dripping down our necks, carrying large
uncomfortable objects across slippery mud not wanting to drop them,
finding places to store 300 apples and oranges in a confined space,
whatever it might be, we have the capacity to *contend against,* and we
have the capacity to be *content with---*to attune ourselves with the
way things are as we go about our tasks. It's a choice.

Often we relate to obstacles in our lives as being unavoidable. It's as
if they've been put in our way deliberately, and we feel burdened and
frustrated by them. There's a quality of resentment, negativity, a
desire to avoid or to switch off. But it's important to recognize that
even if something is particularly obstructive---carrying a large clumsy
object across slippery wet clay in the rain---it's up to us whether we
tense up about it and contend against it. It's our choice to buy into
our story and contend against the way things are, becoming anxious or
irritated. Or not. This is a theme I often use for my own practice, to
recognize, *Its my choice whether I make a problem out of this, or not.
It's my choice to be content with this, or not.*

Our application of mindfulness and clear comprehension, *sati* and
*sampajañña,*has a lot to do with recognizing that we have choices in
how we react to the world around us and to our internal states of mind.
If we also apply the quality of wisdom or discernment, *pañña*, then we
will choose the path of non-contention, of cultivating the capacity to
attune. Even in the midst of the most difficult or challenging
circumstances, we don't have to dwell in aversion, we don't have to
contend against these circumstances. We can find a quality of peace and
clarity in relationship to every situation, even those we would not
choose. We begin to see that there's no thing in life that is inherently
obstructive or unsatisfactory. It all hinges on the way we choose to
handle it.

# Why Am I Talking?

## Ajahn Amaro

### 11-17-08

I've been reflecting on the realm of right speech, an area in our lives
that very swiftly gets carried away on the wind. Just as autumn leaves
off the oak tree end up all over the landscape, so too, our resolution
to be more attentive and more mindful of speech gets carried away on the
winds of circumstance. We might listen to a Dhamma talk on right speech
and take in the various principles expressed by the teacher, but when we
encounter each other we find ourselves wanting to comment on some event
in the day that we've seen, heard, or read about. We overhear a
conversation between others and find ourselves hanging around the edges,
eager to chime in and say, "Oh yeah, I heard about that … yada, yada,
yada." And then off it goes. This is one of the perennial issues of
community life.

The other day someone was quoting the little signs they have up at Wat
Mettā. One of them is the acronym WAIT: Why Am I Talking? We can apply
that sort of inquiry even before we start talking.*Why do I need to
talk? Is the world going to be a better place if I chime in at this
point? Why do I want to get involved? Is it merely to engage for the
sake of engaging? Is it an urge to burn some energy and connect? Is it
just to fill up space? Is this actually going to be a benefit? Is this
going to unite or divide? Is this going to bring clarity to others? Can
I restrain the urge to comment, to speak, to put forth some opinion or
some perspective?*

We're a very large community these days. The monks' room has many people
passing through at different times---just before morning *pūjā*, at
morning tea time, preparing for a morning meeting, during bowl set up,
preparing for the work period, getting changed after the work period,
cleaning up after the meal, enjoying evening tea time, before and after
evening pūjā. It's good to be aware that the conversation we think we're
having with just one person in the monks' room is actually involving
other, unseen people, since the Dhamma Hall on the other side of the
wall is like an echo chamber for the monks' room. This is especially
apparent if things are quiet in the Hall and there are loud
conversations going on in the monks' room. Of course, sometimes there
are things really worth talking about. But often, it's simply random
chatter and only for the sake of engaging. So I encourage us to apply
mindfulness and consideration, asking ourselves, *Is this really
worthwhile? Am I considering that there are probably several people in
the Dhamma Hall who will have to listen to all this? Is this something
that's really worth sharing with so many people? Do I need to engage in
this, or can I put it aside?*

In this way we can notice our accustomed patterns and see what
situations draw us into pointless engagement and continuous verbal
proliferation. When we learn to recognize those situations, we can take
action to put ourselves somewhere else. Go sit on the porch, sit on the
bench outside, or come into the Dhamma Hall. We can choose solitude over
putting ourselves in close quarters where talking and pointless chitchat
tend to launch themselves. This is one of the simplest and most direct
ways the Buddha encouraged the development of mindfulness and the
restraint of the *āsavas,* the outflows. We don't put ourselves in
situations where that out-flowing is going to be encouraged. We put
ourselves somewhere else. It's very simple. We're not creating the
conditions whereby a lack of restraint is being encouraged. Rather,
we're inclining towards containment.

Every so often we need these kinds of encouragements to look at our own
habits and involvements. When we make the effort to restrain and take
the opportunity to disengage, then we can see for ourselves the results:
how much quieter and settled the mind becomes. There's no need to
remember the pointless chitchat or inquire about information that's not
really benefiting our lives. We can recognize for ourselves, *Look how
much more peaceful my mind is while I'm sitting, how much more easeful
it is on the worksite when my mind isn't muddling around with all of
this verbal engagement.* To start with, we can learn to WAIT.

# Our Collective Going Forth

## Ajahn Amaro

### 10-26-08

This is a big day for Venerable Kaccāna. After arriving at Abhayagiri
about two and a half years ago, today he is making the commitment to
ordain into the *Bhikkhu Saṅgha*and is taking on the precepts of
training. It's helpful during occasions like this to reflect on the
process of "going forth" into the Saṅgha---*upasamapadā*---which means
"lifted" or "raised up." It not only reflects an outer process, but an
inner process as well. It's the formal commitment of an individual to
this particular training and his acceptance into the group of monks. It
also reflects an inner commitment and an inner change that's useful for
us to consider, whether we have hair and wear trousers or have a shaved
head and wear a *sabong.*

Essentially when we talk about ordaining, it's usually in terms of going
forth from the household life into homelessness, from being a *garika*
to an *anāgārika*, one who lets go of the household life. But in many
ways, it's more about going forth from self-centered thinking to seeing
in terms of Dhamma. It's going forth from confusion to clarity, from a
life of being half awake or not awake at all to wakefulness. That's
something that is useful for all of us to reflect on whether we're
living as a lay practitioner with commitments and responsibilities in
the world, as an anāgārika, as a *sāmaṇera*, or as a *bhikkhu*who has
already ordained. If we've formally made the commitment, have been
"raised up" into the Saṅgha and have already gone forth, still, the most
important aspect of what we are doing is that going forth from confusion
and self-centered thinking to being awake. Unfortunately, we sometimes
hang on to the formal commitment of having gone forth and taking the
precepts of a monk, so that after years of experience, we can forget the
part about waking up, about going forth from confusion to clarity and
seeing in terms of Dhamma.

Whether we're a lay person or a monastic, this auspicious day of
Sāmaṇera Kaccāna's going forth can encourage all of us to go forth in
terms of our attitudes, the way that we relate to the world, choosing to
be mindful, choosing to be awake, and choosing not to be so
self-concerned or self-obsessed.

On a practical level we have many tasks to pull together today in
preparation for the ordination. But, it's good to bear in mind these
reflections, not just as a philosophical aspiration, but also in terms
of how we work with each other. We can bring that quality of mindfulness
and self-relinquishment to the work we're doing---to our concerns, the
tasks we have, and the way we relate to other people. Whether carrying a
cumbersome bench through the forest, maneuvering a ladder, or setting up
the ordination platform, we're bringing that quality of wakefulness and
attentiveness to the time and place of the situation and the way we're
functioning with each other. That quality of attentiveness will then
inform all of our tasks so that the day itself becomes a resonance of
the gesture of going forth. That's what the ceremony is all about. In
this way it really makes going forth alive and meaningful, informing all
of our lives. It's not only helping outside, it's also helping us to
work on our inner lives, our inner worlds, together. It's our collective
going forth.

# Pesky Woodpeckers

## Ajahn Amaro

### 08-28-08

When we put up a building, we think it's our building, our *sala* or our
*kuṭi*, but no one informs the geckos, the lizards, and the other
creatures in the forest. They think it's their place too. The
woodpeckers were around long before the humans showed up in this valley.
This is the season when woodpeckers start to gather acorns and drill
holes in the buildings, making little cupboards to stash acorns in. When
people come along and put up a building, to a woodpecker, it's just a
very odd-shaped oak tree. Before our beautiful new office building was
even completed, the woodpeckers drilled a nice sequence of holes in this
wonderful cedar trim all the way around the building. To a woodpecker,
the trim is just a very nice, flat surface for stashing acorns with no
bark or branches to work around. And we think, *Pesky woodpeckers; they
shouldn't be ruining our building*. But in reality, we've put up this
attractive opportunity in their zone, and getting upset and irritated
about it is simply proliferation---a story we've added on. As Luang Por
Sumedho would often ask, "Who is being foolish?" Is it us or the
woodpecker? In Thailand the rafters in the Dhamma Hall are great
territory for wandering geckos. If a monk gets annoyed because he
chooses to sit under the rafters and the geckos defecate on him, whose
problem is that?

Our habit is to look at the world from a self-centered perspective: *My
preferences, My priorities.* We look at our body in that same way: *My
body has a right to be totally mobile, completely comfortable, pain
free, and in an environment with the most desirable temperature at all
times.* When that view gets intruded upon---when there's an infection,
if the body is afflicted with a poison oak rash, or if it is too hot or
too cold---then we become reactive and that same self-righteousness
arises: *This is an intrusion upon my space, my time, my convenience. I
haven't got time for this; it shouldn't be like this.*If we believe
those perceptions, then we endlessly create more *dukkha* for
ourselves---this sense of dis-ease and dissatisfaction---because it's
just the voice of self view, isn't it?

We don't tend to look at our body as a food source, but it is. It's a
collection of organic matter. I never really understood this until I was
living in Thailand. At first I was resentful of mosquitoes coming in and
feeding on me, but at some point I realized that the body is a large,
pungent magnet, like a big supermarket sign advertising a food source
where the doors are always open. We don't think of ourselves like that.
We think, *These darn mosquitoes are annoying*me!*These flies are
landing on*me! But if we see that this body is simply a pile of
heat-producing organic matter with interesting fumes, it makes sense
that it would draw insects to it. If we shift the perspective a little,
and drop that sense of self view, then we can similarly drop the burden
of resentment, the feeling that life is being unfair.

That's the essence of the Middle Way---shifting from a self-centered
view to the view that our bodies, the material world around us, and our
minds are all natural systems---not "me," not "mine." And when we make
that shift, when we adopt a view centered on Dhamma, rather than on the
illusion of an independent self, then the world changes quite
dramatically.

So we can take care of buildings at the monastery, protect the body from
insects, while at the same time not create stress or irritation or the
sense of burden that comes with self view. If we understand that
everything is part of the natural order, then "invasion" from the
outside is impossible, because everything occupies the same territory,
it's all of the same order. With this understanding, the heart relates
to it all in a radically different way.

# Remembering to Loosen Up

## Ajahn Amaro

### 09-06-08

By reflecting on the theme of kindness and establishing the quality of
*mettā,*we gain insight into how mettā is developed. One of the not so
obvious places where we create qualities of unkindness is in the way
that we relate to our own attitudes, opinions, and pet projects through
self-identification. *My responsibility, my job, my role*. Many of these
aspects of our lives slip into existence and claim a substantial reality
without our noticing. *Of course this is what I am. This is my job. I'm
the water monk; I'm the co-abbot; I'm the head cook; I'm the driver.
This is what I am.* The mind takes hold of these particular attitudes
and creates a false substantiality around them. The more solid they
become, the more we create the causes of friction.

If we want to sharpen a blade, we don't get a soft grindstone made of
gelatin. We get a good, hard grindstone for the blade to rub against,
something that's solid, unyielding and abrasive. The more the mind
hardens around opinions, then the more we buy into them, creating false
solidities and divisions between the apparent me and the apparent world.
The more solid and unyielding these attitudes and opinions become, then,
just like an abrasive grindstone, the more friction there is and the
more sparks that will fly.

So developing the quality of *mettā*---in terms of non-contention
in the way that we behave and relate to others---is an important
dimension to notice. We don't often think of this in terms of
*mettā* practice, but it's helpful to bring a genuine attentiveness
to the kind of fixedness, the sense of territoriality that the mind can
have, or the fixedness of views that identifies with a particular role,
position, or responsibility. *This is my position. This is my job. You
do your thing, and I'll do mine.*

I remember one of the nuns from Chithurst Monastery talking about her
pre-nun life in the kitchen at Amaravati. She said, "It's quite
incredible---the opinions about the way to cut a carrot." She spent
three years as an *anagārikā* at Amaravati, which has a kitchen
about three or four times the size of the kitchen here at
Abhayagiri---and at least ten times the number of opinions. People were
almost coming to blows on occasions and stomping out of the house.
"Those carrots have been cut wrong---it's completely out of order,
inappropriate, and contrary to the Dhamma to cut carrots like that!"

So we might not notice in the course of a day the 10,000 ways that the
mind creates a sense of territory, priority, or position and seeks ways
to establish them. We can be very polite, keep the precepts, and do
things in the appropriate way, but at the same time sending out signals
that are based on identifying with a particular position. *I'm right.
This is my job. You don't matter. What I'm doing is important. My views
are correct. What you do is totally insignificant.* It's all the habits
of self creating the *I* and *my.* We can take the ordinary, utterly
innocent activities of our monastic lives---helping out with the work
tasks, washing the dishes, putting things away in our cupboards, or
whatever it might be---and use them to feed those I-creating,
my-creating habits. It's useful to bring attention to that, to see where
we create a fixedness of views and a false solidity. Then we can
challenge our own opinions, habits, and preferences by training the
heart into not buying into them, not going along with that kind of
subtle grasping. And remember to loosen up! This is a genuine act of
kindness. It's a kindness to ourselves not to create that sort of stress
and fearfulness within our own hearts. It's also a great kindness to the
people around us; they are much more able to harmonize with us when
we're able to harmonize with them. There's less of the alienation that
comes from clinging to self-view and self-creating habits. We are no
longer like a hard unyielding grindstone.

There are many different dimensions to developing *mettā*. We can
see how much of a difference it makes when we notice within ourselves a
hardening of the heart or a clinging to an opinion, belief, or
preference, and then we change direction by relaxing around our views
and loosening up our identification with those opinions and preferences.
We experience for ourselves the blessings that come from the more
easeful and pleasant world we live in because we're not vying for
positions, judging each other, fearing being judged, or positioning
ourselves against this or that person. Notice how delightful and
wonderful it is to have none of that being created. We realize, *Oh look
at that. If I don't create it, then it's not there. What an amazing
surprise!* So much of the stress and difficulty of our personal worlds
is generated from our own *cittas*, our own minds and hearts. And
so, if we ourselves stop creating that division and stress---that
friction and heat from the grindstone---then we find the citta becomes
cool, because the division and tension simply aren't there.

# Bringing Sampajañña and Pañña to Work

## Ajahn Amaro

### 08-14-05

We have these community work days to create opportunities for the
broader community to help contribute to the material fabric of the
monastery and to support the life and energy of the Saṅgha. Along with
emphasizing that, monasteries provide a context for individual spiritual
development and cultivation. Our teacher Ajahn Chah strongly emphasized
the essential quality of Saṅgha or community---learning how to
collaborate and fit in with each other. So when we have these work days
together, it is very much in the spirit of developing
Saṅgha---cultivating a capacity to put forth effort and energy in a
collaborative way. It requires a lot of attention to do it skillfully.

When we talk about *sati*, mindfulness, we often think about it in terms
of being careful with the task or job we're doing. However, along with
mindfulness, the other elements of clear
comprehension---*sampajañña*---and wisdom---*pañña*---are crucial. Clear
comprehension means being aware of the context of the activity in which
we are engaged, for instance, being mindful of the people with whom we
are working. An example of this would be making sure the sharp end of
the mattock we are swinging isn't about to go through the jaw of our
work companion, or when we are turning around with a running chain saw
in our hands, making sure there isn't a soft fleshy object immediately
behind us. We want to avoid "The Redwood Valley Chainsaw Massacre," so
we attend to our physical surroundings and also recognize that we are
working with others.

Another quality we can be aware of is sharing. We are looking to do our
part of the work and to include others as well. For example, sometimes
we might become absorbed in a job that is really enjoyable, and so we
completely forget or don't notice that there is another person in the
group, standing there feeling like a spare part, waiting for us. Or we
might do the opposite. It could be really hot outside, but other people
seem to be enjoying the work, so we let them do it all while we sit and
watch. With clear comprehension, we attend to the energetic feeling of
the people we are working with. We pay attention to how we're feeling,
how everyone else is faring, and we notice that, if it's hot and dry,
maybe the people working need a drink of water.

With sati-sampajañña, mindfulness combined with clear comprehension,
there's an overall attending to and caring for not only our own needs,
but the needs of the people around us. Our minds are attuned to making
the time we spend working with others an opportunity to develop that
collaborative spirit. It's not only an effort to benefit the
monastery---creating more dwelling spaces, maintaining the finished
buildings, digging a trench, clearing away brush, sorting out the
stores, and so forth---it's also an effort to fit in and learn how to
support others. And it's about letting others support us as well, which
can sometimes be more difficult than the other way round.

Another element we combine with sati is paññā, wisdom. Paññā is
recognizing that all of this is impermanent, not-self, and
unsatisfactory. So when we're putting something together or attending to
some project, there's an overarching recognition that eventually it's
all going to fall apart and disperse. So there can be no inherent
satisfaction in the projects we undertake if that satisfaction is based
on a sense of permanence with these projects. And with this insight into
impermanence we can also recognize that these activities we are engaging
in are not truly ours. This recognition brings a lightness to the tasks
we engage in. When we are doing our work projects, we are developing
expedient and useful skills. But there's a relinquishing of what we do
as well. There is not an ownership or claiming of the things we bring
into existence.

Another teaching that Ajahn Chah would stress over and over was to
recognize that "the cup is already broken." The objects of the material
world have within them an impermanent nature. They are destined to fall
apart and disintegrate. The building we are currently constructing is
already broken; it will fall apart or be demolished someday, so the
efforts we're making are not toward a permanent end. We still continue
to do what we do carefully, attentively, as well as we can, but there's
a lightness, a spaciousness to the way it's held.

If we realize that the cup is already broken, then when the day comes
that it does indeed break, our heart doesn't break with it. The cup
physically smashes, and we realize, *Oh, this is its *anicca. That's
always been a part of it. Its anicca is simply ripening at this moment.
Nothing has gone wrong; nothing bad has happened.* We are ready for
that. There's no sense of loss or diminution in that regard.

When we hold things with wisdom in this way, then there's a heedfulness,
a fullness that we experience with every act we do. We're not trying to
make it be more than it actually is, and we're not adding anything onto
it. So there's purity, simplicity, and a good-heartedness we can bring
to everything we do.

# The Importance of Kondañña's Insight

## Ajahn Amaro

### 11-15-08

In the Dhammacakkapavatana Sutta*---*the Discourse on the Turning of the
Wheel of Dhamma---the Buddha addressed the five *samanas*, including
one named Kondañña, who were his practice companions before he became a
Buddha. At the end of this talk, the Buddha recognizes that
Kondañña has, with deep insight, understood the Dhamma. He says,
"*Annnyassivatabho Kondañño, annyassivatabho
Kondaññoti*---Kondañña understands, Kondañña understands." Kondañña
had awakened to the nature of Dhamma: "*Dhammacakkhuṁ udapādi*---the eye
of Dhamma arose." Then the sutta describes exactly what it was that
Kondañña saw. It wasn't a spectacular vision of the heavens opening up,
a bewildering light display that he experienced, or streams of deities
beaming down from the heavens. Rather, his vision of the Dhamma is
stated simply in the phrase, "*Yaṅkiñci* *samudaya* *dhammaṁ*
*sabbantaṁ* *nirodha* *dhammanti---*whatever is subject to arising is
subject to ceasing."

On a worldly level this seems completely unremarkable. That which
begins, ends. Whatever goes up, must come down. If it's born, it dies.
*No big deal,* we might think. But it's worth our reflection: This
seemingly simple insight, which makes all the difference in the life of
Kondañña*,* which enables him to awaken to the Dhamma, enter into the
stream of Dhamma, thus making full enlightenment absolutely certain from
that point on---why should that be the most profound insight?

It's helpful to reflect on this and use it as a theme of meditation.
*Why would it change my life to see that all that is subject to arising
is subject to ceasing? If that's truly known and understood by me, why
should that mean that full enlightenment is inevitable, that in a
certain amount of time it will ripen in my complete and total
liberation? How can that understanding be so important?* We can practice
picking up that theme, applying it, and seeing it clearly for ourselves.
It's not simply a collection of words that we hear,*Oh yeah, "All that's
subject to arising is subject to ceasing." Yeah, I know all that.* We
can practice exploring it and applying it, moment by moment, throughout
the day. *Why should that be so liberating? Why should that be so
significant? Why should that be the change of vision that alters my
whole way of life, my whole way of seeing who and what I am?* This is
for all of us to investigate.

When we apply this insight to everything---to what we think, to what we
feel, to the pleasant experiences, the painful experiences, the
beautiful, the ugly, the emotionally pleasing, the emotionally
distressing---it awakens a sense of the nature of experience itself. We
begin to see that when we aren't judging life in worldly terms---good,
bad, right, wrong, inside, outside, me, you, beautiful, ugly---we're
seeing everything in terms of its nature rather than its content or
whether we like it or we don't like it, whether we call it inside or
outside. We awaken to that intuition within us that everything internal
and external, mental and physical, is part of a natural order. It's not
self. It's not who or what we are. It's not personal. It's not alien.
It's just Dhamma. It's nature itself. This understanding undercuts the
way we see ourselves as, "Me in here, the world out there." We no longer
believe that those perceptions reflect the way things truly are.

This insight seems like nothing, doesn't it? Our ego-centered thinking
reacts like it's oxygen: *Big deal. There's a lot of oxygen about, so
what?* But when oxygen is denied us, then it quickly becomes apparent
how crucial it is. In a similar way, when we apply this insight to how
we experience our thoughts, feelings, and perceptions, then it changes
the whole way we hold things. And we can notice that change within the
heart. *Oh right, this is a changing thing. I can call it good or bad. I
can call it success or failure. But its primary quality is that it's
changing. It came into being and now it's ending.* *That's the most
important thing about it.* We notice that shift in the heart, that shift
that happens within us when we apply Kondañña's insight. It changes
everything because we're no longer obsessing---fixating on the content
of experience. We're becoming aware of the process of experience itself.

That's fundamentally what insight, *vipassana*, is about. Vipassana is
insight into the nature of experience itself---that moment of clear
seeing when there's a direct awareness of how experience works, what
experience is. And the result of that is liberation. At that moment the
heart knows, *This is merely a pattern of nature, a coming, a
going---changing. That's all it is. That's all it can be. Nothing to get
excited about. Nothing to get alarmed about.*Right there is the moment
of freedom in seeing clearly that the heart is unburdened. There is an
unentangled knowing, at least to some small degree. That liberating
quality is right here, in the midst of everyday activity, mundane
thoughts, and feelings. Just like Kondañña, it is possible for us to
access this liberating insight right here and right now.

# Everything Is Mind Attended

## Ajahn Amaro

### 12-15-08

Even though the snow falls nearly every year, I'm always struck by the
same impression: How much it changes the perception of world I live in.
Water arriving in a particular form, turning all the horizontal and
semi-horizontal surfaces white, the sound and the shape, everything
highlighted in a strange, unusual way, all the color washed out. It's a
very good teaching, isn't it?

It's like the mood of the mind. It can be so persistent when it's stuck
on some track, excited, irritated, or worried about something. There
seems to be a coloring of the whole world. This is my problem. I'm
supposed to worry about this. I have to worry about this. This is my
project. The only thing that really matters in the world are the
railings on the Bhikkhu Commons kuṭi or clearing the trap under the sink
at Casa Serena. The center of the world is this particular job we have,
these letters that have to be written or this meal that has to be
cooked. These things that the mind latches onto seem so real and
permanent---our particular projects, responsibilities, fears, hopes, and
desires. Well, of course it's that way. Can't you see? Then
suddenly---snap! Overnight the world changes color and there's a whole
different mood. Suddenly, Oh look, it's all different. How utterly
transformed our perceptions can be merely by a different shape, coloring
of the landscape, or the sound of the valley.

This is an excellent reflection on our moods. When we think we're in the
middle of some difficult tangle, some big issue or conflict, an
important project, a difficult relationship---suddenly it all shifts.
Poof! It's not a problem anymore because it just changed. The thing that
we thought we had to worry about wasn't anything we needed to be
concerned about in the first place. It wasn't the way we thought it was.
It was a mistaken impression. When we see and reflect in this way---how
much the world can change when we're in the midst of some particular
anxiety, worry, project, or activity---it helps to provide a
perspective. Oh, this is only my impression. Now I see.

We get caught up in thinking, I have my name written on this particular
issue. It's mine. I'm responsible for this project. I have to dig this
hole. I have to fix this railing. I'm the one who has to pay the debt.
It seems so real and important, and so much like it's the center of the
world. We see what the mind has put onto it, what Luang Por Chah would
call "a mind-attended thing." He would say, "Everything is mind
attended." Even though in the Abhidhamma it says there are some things
which are mind attended and there are some things which are not mind
attended, Luang Por Chah would say, "Well, actually, everything is mind
attended." As soon as we know about something, we form an opinion, make
a judgment, and create things with our thoughts.

A simple event like a snowfall, a change of the landscape, and we're
reminded that this particular thing that's so significant to us is only
significant because of our particular conditioning, our particular
expectations, fears, hopes, or abilities. The thing's significance is
not inherent, it's merely something the mind has added onto the thing.
With thst realization we can carry out the work we need to do. We can
fix those railings, dig this hole, cook that food, answer those letters
and move that table around those difficult corners in a much more
easeful and peaceful way. It's not the center of the world. We can see
that it isn't so personal, so burdensome, or so much about "me" and
"mine." When we realize this, then everything we need to attend to---the
events of the day and the responsibilities that we have---is much more
natural and easy to carry out. It becomes more like breathing. The body
does it on its own. It doesn't have to be "me" or the ego that does it.
Gravity works on its own---I don't have to *do* gravity. When we start
to function with that same kind of naturalness and easefulness, working
and living in community becomes just like breathing.

# Exploring Uncertainty in Daily Life

## Ajahn Amaro

### 07-18-05

We often think of insight meditation as something that we do as part of
the formal practice. The usual instructions are to take some time to
focus and concentrate the mind, and, when it's steady, to begin
reflecting upon the flow of experience in terms of *anicca*, *dukkha*,
and *anattā*---impermanence or uncertainty, unsatisfactoriness, and
selflessness or things not being self. Luang Por Chah encouraged us to
employ these themes of investigation and contemplation, not just on the
meditation mat, but also throughout the day, during all of our
activities. We can use these themes as constant companions to explore
and process our own experience as we relate to the events of the day.

Ajahn Chah particularly emphasized the contemplation of anicca. He would
often render anicca as "uncertainty," rather than "impermanence." When
we think of things being "impermanent," it can have a remote or
objective quality, whereas "uncertainty" describes the feeling of the
mind and heart when we experience change and transiency. That's what we
perceive---the feeling of uncertainty. We don't know. It's not certain
because things are changing. It's not predictable.

This experience is easily accessible in our day-to-day lives, and is
extremely useful to remember and sustain as a contemplation. We can
understand this with something as simple as drinking a cup of tea
prepared by someone else. As we bring the cup up to our mouths, we don't
know how it's going to taste; there's that moment of almost palpable
uncertainty. Or when we are on our way to perform some task, we might
think, *I'm now heading up to the workshop to get this particular tool.*
But if we reflect that finding the tool there is uncertain*,* then when
we get to the workshop and find that in fact the tool isn't there, it's
not a problem.

Although Ajahn Pasanno is leaving for Sacramento this morning, if we
keep the uncertainty reflection in mind, then we can be clear that we
don't really know if he is going to get to there. The van driving him
might have a burst tire or the drive shaft might snap somewhere along
the highway, and then he would spend the day contemplating the heat
element in the Valley. Not that I wish for that to happen, but I can say
to myself, *Oh, Ajahn Pasanno is going to Sacrameno is he? Is that so?
Really?* All we can know is that there's a plan for him to go to
Sacramento. There's a plan to prepare the meal; there's a plan to go
into town. This much we know, but what will happen is uncertain. Are
things really the way we judge them to be? It's not certain. This is not
meant to create doubt and confusion, but the more we perceive each
moment as uncertain, the more we see clearly that we don't know what
will happen. We don't know what the outcome will be. We don't know if
what we're doing will work or will happen the way we expect.

Similarly, we may judge the people around us and think that they are
being greedy, aggressive, or selfish because of something we perceive
they are doing. Later we might find out that they weren't being greedy,
aggressive, or selfish---they were actually doing something that was
helpful for somebody else. *It's merely my perception, my interpretation
of a particular act, my presumption, my guesswork, or what I read into
it.* When we see our assumptions clearly and find out that we were wrong
about someone's motive, the framework of anicca can provide a quality of
spaciousness and freedom for ourselves. The perception of anicca loosens
the boundaries and obstructions we continually create through thinking,
presumptions, opinions, judgments, expectations, and plans. We can learn
to hold material objects, thoughts, feelings, and actions in the context
of uncertainty. *This judgment is uncertain*, or *This activity is
uncertain*. When perceiving in this way, the heart is completely ready
and open for the changes that can and often do occur.

If things go in a fortunate way, then we feel the pleasure of that. If
they go in an unfortunate way, then we feel the painfulness of it. Ajahn
Chah would say that clinging to happiness is just as bad as clinging to
unhappiness. It's like trying to take hold of the tail of the snake
rather than the head. If things go in a fortunate way, we might clinging
to happiness and say to ourselves, *Oh great, now I have it, this is
excellent*---which means the heart has invested in that happiness. This
happiness is like the tail of the snake. Even if we grasp the harmless
tail, it's not very long before the head whips around and bites us. For
example, if we've been preparing the meal, we think, *Oh great, this is
the best potato salad I've ever made. It's really good, I'm really
pleased with this*. Then someone comes along, takes a mouthful and says,
"Is it supposed to taste like this?" The anger or misery we feel is
exactly proportional to the degree we had invested our happiness in the
potato salad being just right, pleasing, and good. So we can learn to
see that judgment as it's arising and consider, *Is the salad truly
good? It's uncertain.* That way, we don't take hold of the snake's tail.
If someone says it's bad, we can realize that it's simply their
judgment, and the snake's head doesn't bite us. We might say to
ourselves, *That person's a fool for thinking that.* But then we can see
that this too is our own judgment. "Good" or "bad" salad, or whatever,
is just the way we perceive things. It was uncertain to begin with. When
we see this clearly, the causes for conflict, confusion, stress, and
living a burdened life are no longer generated.

# Seeing Clearly Into the Chain of Causation

## Ajahn Amaro

### 08-04-05

Last week at the Spirit Rock Family Retreat, we saw many small, young,
human beings surrounded by wholesome structures and examples offered in
the way of skillful guidance. Seeing the good results of that in just a
few days made me reflect on the idea that if we can catch things early
and have an influence at the beginning---as something is setting out and
taking shape---then, even if the influence is small, it can go a very
long way. The lessons we learn and examples that are internalized early
on can affect us quite deeply.

Similarly, this works with how we apply the teachings. In particular,
when we reflect on the cycle or chain of dependent origination---the
laws of causality that govern our experience and the arising and ceasing
of *dukkha*---we can see that the earlier in the chain that we catch
this process of causality, the less work we have to do to uproot
suffering. When we look at the way we handle the worldly
winds---happiness and unhappiness, praise and criticism, success and
failure, gain and loss---the mind can be observed reacting to and
chasing after gain, running away from loss, identifying with, seizing
hold of and cherishing praise, rejecting criticism, and so forth. The
sooner these reactive habits are seen and known, the less sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief, and despair we experience.

We live very much in our everyday world of perception and feeling. We
see sights and hear sounds, touch objects, make decisions, engage with
our bodies in the material world and with the 10,000 thoughts, moods,
and ideas that arise from those various forms of sense contact. The more
we internalize and make use of the teachings on dependent origination,
the more we are aware that this is merely sense contact---*phassa*.
Sense contact gives rise to pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral
feelings---this is beautiful, this is ugly, this is ordinary. From that
launch-pad of feeling, in the ordinary flow of our experience, *taṇhā*
or craving arises---*vedanā paccaya taṇhā*---feeling conditions
craving, which then leads to sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and
despair. When we know this chain of causation, we are able to see that a
feeling can easily turn into thoughts of, *I can't stand this. This is
wrong. This is bad. I don't like this. I have to get rid of it*. Or the
opposite, *I want it. This is good. This is mine. I have to keep it,
hold onto it, or own it.* When this cycle begins with possessiveness, we
can see how that sense of ownership causes a feeling of loss, and then
dukkha ensues.

Again, if we influence a three-year-old in a wholesome manner, those
influences can have an effect for a lifetime. Similarly, if we mindfully
catch the process right at the point where vedanā is conditioning
taṇhā---feeling conditioning craving---the cycle can be broken right
there. We can live with a heart completely at peace in the realm of
feeling, reflecting: *This vedanā is present*. I don't have to own it.
Praise is sweet; criticism is bitter. Gain is sweet; loss is bitter.
This is how it is. I don't need to make anything more of it than just
that. This is the mind that likes sweetness, this is the mind that
dislikes bitterness. That's all. It's empty. There's nothing there. It
doesn't belong to me or anyone else. It's merely one of the attributes
of nature coming into being, taking shape, and dissolving. That's all it
is.* So the heart remains at peace, even though there's full engagement
in the world of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and feeling, as well
as perceiving, doing, and acting. There's full engagement, but it is
free of confusion and there is no identification with it.

If we catch the process even earlier, way down at the deep-tissue level,
and mindfulness is sustained acutely, then ignorance---the whole duality
of me as a person experiencing the world out there, of me here going
somewhere else, the subject being the knower of the object---is not
given any strength or substance. If we don't catch it, however, that is
when *avijjā paccaya* *saṅkhāra---*ignorance conditions mental
formations. When there is ignorance, then that duality of sankhara or
compoundedness arises. But if there is full awareness, full knowing,
full mindfulness, then even that subtle degree of ignorance or delusion
does not arise and is not given credence.

Discourses on dependent origination often state*,*"With the cessation of
ignorance there is the cessation of mental formations, and with the
cessation of mental formations, there is the cessation of
consciousness," and so forth. Phra Payutto points out in his book
*Dependent Origination*that *cessation* is not meant to be taken only in
terms of something beginning and then ending; the Pali word is
*nirodha*, which also implies *non-arising*. When there's no ignorance,
then mental formations do not arise; the mind does not create the world
of *thingness*, or *this-and-thatness*. This is the realization of
Dhamma. It is simply Dhamma. It is not fabricated. It is not divided. It
is not created. It is not split into me being here and the world out
there---a subject separated from an object. This is the peace and
clarity of realizing the Dhamma here and now.

# Abhayagiri is Complete

## Ajahn Amaro

### 11-03-12

I'm experiencing a very worldly delight in non-involvement,
non-responsibility. It's lovely to be here as a visitor, not having to
feel responsible for making all the threads come together, as I did
before leaving for Amamavati a couple years ago. But it's also important
to note---especially during the busy festival season we're in right
now---that the complications that are difficult are not the external
ones, like the logistical nightmares the work monk has to deal with.
It's the logistical nightmares that are *inside* that are the real
troublemakers. It's always good to bring that to mind. It's not the
external complications that really make things difficult, it's the way
we pick things up, create complications, and tangle things within
ourselves. That's the real cause of tension, of *dukkha*, of stress
within.

Every monastery is the same during the festival season. It draws
together a large complex array of different tasks that need to be taken
care of with so many extra people lending a hand while also being part
of the mix. As Luang Por Pasanno was saying yesterday, we need to lean
into the wind in a very conscious way so as to counteract the tendency
we have to create inner complication, because there's such a great
potential during this time for getting caught up, being busy, resentful,
or excited.

Yesterday when some of us were walking around with Tan Ṭhitābho in the
morning, we saw so many new *kuṭis* and the new workshop which were all
were built over the last couple of years since I departed. These were
things that Luang Por Pasanno, myself, and others would fantasize about.
*It'd be a nice place to have a kuṭi there, or we could do this here, or
maybe we should put the workshop there*. Many of these things have
suddenly become a reality. Of course, these physical changes took place
slowly and steadily over time. So much has evolved since June 1st, 1996
when I, along with Anāgārika Tom, now Ajahn Karuṇadhammo, Debbie, and a
gang of others rolled up to the newly purchased property. On that very
first evening, once we'd cleaned up the house, set up the domed tents
that we'd be living in, gotten ourselves sorted and settled, I remember
thinking, *Now the monastery is complete, now it is done*.

With those words, I was taking a leaf out of Luang Por Liem's book. I
remember when preparations were underway for Luang Por Chah's funeral
and a *cetiya* for his cremation was under construction. A whole new
eating hall, road system, water towers, and over 630 toilets were all
under construction simultaneously. During that time, there was someone
who was touring the monastery and saw all these different construction
projects. He was quite amazed and bewildered. He then saw Luang Por Liem
who was running the whole show and had just come down off of the roof of
a *sālā* with a welding torch in hand. The man said to Luang Por, "This
is incredible, this is amazing, there's so much happening here, I bet
you'll be really glad when it's finished." And Luang Por Liem responded
in his inimitable Luang Por Liem way, "I finish it every day." That is a
very simple observation, but coming from Luang Por Liem, it's not merely
a nice thing to say. It's not just sophistry; it's the actuality. Yes,
we have bare girders here and wet concrete over there and so many pits
for the concrete rings to go in under all of these toilets and they are
all sitting out there in heaps. But it's completely finished, just as it
is. This is what it is, right now.

When there's a lot of activity going on---going from here to there,
finding this and taking it over there, picking up these gas bottles and
moving them over there, taking them to the wrong place and then taking
them back---there can be a current of becoming, the flood, the *oghā* of
becoming, which can become very intense. So it is important during the
flow of activity and doingness to be leaning into the wind, to be
leaning against that.

When we do something as simple as fill up the gas tank, we can think,
*Okay, now Abhayagiri is complete. Everything is fully completed.
Everything is done.* We reflect in that way, even though part of our
worldly instinct might say, *Yeah but, but, but, look at my list! I have
so many things to do and they are important and they have my name on
them and I can't just brush them away.* But with the reflection,
*Abhayagiri is complete*, we can keep that worldly perspective in its
appropriate place and recognize that, within a larger context, it's just
as Luang Por Liem was expressing: It's finished. Even when the gas tank
is half filled, it's finished. As you're carrying along the carpets or
untangling the flags, it's finished. Even though the knot is still
there, it's finished.

That's because the Dhamma is here and now. The Dhamma is *akāliko*,
timeless, and it's *sandiṭṭhiko*, apparent here and now. The Dhamma
doesn't simply happen when the knot is untangled or when the carpet is
laid out and all of the food is cooked. It's not, *Okay, the Dhamma is
here now, it wasn't here before*. The Dhamma is always here. During the
morning reflection, it's here already, not only after the reflection is
finished and we get on to the practice during the day. It's here now.

If we remember that---really let the mind awaken to that---then that
presence to the Dhamma will inform our every action. We can then attune
to the *citta*, the heart---to that quality, that fundamental, timeless
presence of Dhamma---in the midst of activity. Then any external
complications won't contribute to any internal complications, to any
internal *papañca*.

So without further ado I offer these thoughts for your consideration
today. Enjoy, as they say.

# So What am I, Chopped Liver!?

## Ajahn Amaro

### 12-01-08

A theme we explored on the Thanksgiving Retreat was "complaining and
blaming." I thought it would be a useful theme because our culture tends
toward complaint. *If I'm suffering, then the way to the end of
suffering is to complain or blame. I'm suffering, therefore it's
somebody else's fault. I've been treated unfairly. This isn't right. It
shouldn't be this way.* This is powerful conditioning in our lives. I
remember a New Yorker cartoon with a student asking a monk, "You say
life is suffering, but isn't it also complaining?" It's useful to take a
period of time to reflect on the unconscious or semiconscious way we
react to the experience of suffering---to reflect on the urge to be
critical, to be negative, to complain, or to find fault in ourselves or
in the things around us. While reflecting like that, we can broaden our
view by inquiring into the matter. *Why do I think I shouldn't have to
experience this illness, this pain, this weather, this food, this person
sitting next to me?*

Then we can broaden our view further by consciously evoking a sense of
appreciation and gratitude for the gifts and opportunities we have in
our lives. This is a way to catch the mind's habitual movement toward
criticism or complaint, its movement toward the classic
glass-is-half-empty attitude. Evoking gratitude goes directly against
that complaining, criticizing, blaming mind. But we need to make sure
that this gratitude isn't based on a "think pink" attitude---trying to
sugarcoat things and pretend that we're not really feeling critical or
negative. It doesn't help much to paste an artificial expression of
gratitude on top of a negative mood or a feeling.

We begin with listening to the critical, blaming, or complaining mind,
and hearing what that mind is saying. What's it coming up with? Is it
the feeling of being unfairly treated, slighted, left out, or ignored?
Can we can hear the mind's cry of righteous indignation, *So what am I,
chopped liver?!* We receptively listen to the affronted, hurt, wounded,
abandoned, irritated feelings, and hear the mind coming up with the
reactions and thought processes that follow those feelings. We are
simply allowing this experience to be known---this narrow, painful,
reactionary state of complaining or feeling slighted. By bringing
awareness to that, fully knowing its reactive quality, we can recognize
and inquire, *This is a really painful state. Why would I choose to
react like this? Why would I want to carry this around and burden my
heart with this?* We're not saying to ourselves, *Oh, I'm supposed to be
grateful now, I should plant some gratitude in here.* Instead we are
simply seeing the painfulness of our narrow, self-centered reactions.
Once we see this, then the very acknowledgment of that painfulness can
enable us to let go and relax. In the broadening of our views and
attitudes, what arises is gratitude. We are able to appreciate the
bigger picture, the gifts and the lessons we have received, and the
potential opportunities we have in the world.

# The Development of Equanimity

## Ajahn Amaro

### 11-01-08

When we do the chanting on the four divine abodes, the
*Brahmavihāras*---*mettā*, *karuna*, *mudita*,
*upekkha;*loving-kindness, compassion, gladness, equanimity*---*going
through each one, it's important to notice the development of equanimity
around reflections on *kamma,*actions of cause and effect. "I am the
owner of my kamma, heir to my kamma, born of my kamma, related to my
kamma, abide supported by my kamma*.* Whatever kamma I shall do, for
good or for ill, of that I will be the heir." The other
Brahmavihāras---mettā, karuṇā and muditā---have an emotional tone, a
quality of wishing well to ourselves and others, of wishing to be free
from suffering. But the fourth one, upekkhā, equanimity, is developed
through a conscious reflection on *kamma* *vipāka,* kamma and its
results. That may not sound terribly interesting, and so it can easily
be pushed aside. But equanimity is the most refined of the
Brahmavihāras. It's quite a significant mental quality and is difficult
to establish.

When we consciously reflect on cause and effect, we can distinguish one
from the other in our direct experience, *Ah, this is the cause of that
result*. Or with greater detail, *Because I've been generous and kind
and I've been keeping the precepts well, then an inner lightness and
confidence in my own goodness has developed.*Or *Because I've been
selfish, deceitful, clumsy, casual, or sloppy, there's this feeling of
regret, self-criticism, and a negative emotional tone.* This is a very
conscious way of letting go of the content of happiness or unhappiness
and seeing clearly for ourselves. *Because of this good action, there's
a pleasant result. Because of this unskillful action, there's an
unpleasant result. I see.* It's the law of nature---because of this,
there is that. It's the Dhamma in action. It's extraordinarily simple,
and when we see it clearly, it takes a huge amount of the alienation and
burden away from our experiences. This is not a small thing---it's
essential to our practice.

As soon as the mind sees things in terms of right and wrong, when it
buys into those kinds of judgments, equanimity is lost. *This is right.
This is the right way to do it. That's wrong. That's the wrong way to do
it. He shouldn't be doing it that way. He should be doing it this way*.
But by cultivating equanimity, we can reflect and see more clearly, *I'm
calling that "right" because of what? Because of the conventions of
Theravada Buddhism?*Or, *I'm calling this "right" because of my
understanding of the mechanics of the hillside? Or how the drainage
channels work?* We can more clearly see how our conditioning leaps onto
those judgments, saying, *This is absolutely right, that is absolutely
wrong. It should be this way. It shouldn't be that way.* We believe it
over and over again, a thousand times a day. We believe in our judgments
and take them to be absolutely real. But with some equanimity, the mind
has the ability to recognize that this is called "right" because of a
reason, and it's called "wrong" because of a reason. There's a cause,
and "right" and "wrong" are simply effects.

Consider reflecting on a simple thing like eating. Because we have human
bodies, we become hungry and need to eat. Needing to keep the body going
to sustain life is the cause, needing to eat is the effect. When we eat
we choose what to use to keep the body going. This effect appears as
likes and dislikes, rights and wrongs. The mind chatters away, *That's
great food. That's terrible food. He's really brilliant at cooking this.
Oh no, he's ruined that again.* It's only because we need to eat food
that those judgments arise. It's because of having a human
body---needing to put stuff into these holes in our faces, chomp it up
and swallow it down to sustain life---that we have any relationship at
all to these plants and animals in this way. If we didn't have human
bodies, if we were all in the *arūpa* realm where they have no bodies,
then we wouldn't relate to fruit, vegetables, or meat in this way. None
of that would be perceived as food---there wouldn't even be a word for
physical food. It simply wouldn't concern us.

So this is an encouragement for all of us---particularly with the rainy
weather, working outside in the rain, trickles of chilly water running
down our necks and into our socks---to notice when the mind says "like"
or "dislike," "right" or "wrong." Because it's the rainy season,
these feelings might arise. This is the cause, and this is the effect.
See how that small reflection can take us a step back from the notion
that right, wrong, like, and dislike are objective or lasting realities.
And with that stepping back and seeing things more clearly, what we draw
closer to is the Brahmavihāra of equanimity.

# The Role of Observance Days

## Ajahn Amaro

### 08-29-08

The purpose of our weekly Observance Day is to put our usual daily tasks
down and focus on the precepts and the formal spiritual qualities of our
life. It's a day of recollecting and observing, of remembering the
Dhamma and our original motivation for being here at the monastery. It's
a time to remember the possibility we have as human beings to let go of
all confusion, delusion, aversion, greed, and self-centeredness. It's a
time for renewing our motivation and to begin again fresh.

As monastics, we shave our heads, taking the hair back to the root, back
to the source, to begin again. There's that quality of tidying
up---cleaning the shrine room, cleaning the kitchen, squaring things
away, renewing our precepts. On a practical and symbolic level we're
keeping the monastery tidy and looking after the things that have been
offered for our use. On the internal level, we're remembering our
priorities and helping to clarify the central principles of our lives.

The activities of the Observance Day---taking the precepts, shaving the
head, having the all-night vigil, and putting aside the work
routine---are all geared toward reinforcing the reason we're here at the
monastery. We're not here to construct *kuṭis*, post pictures on the
website, cook meals, or any of the 10,000 tasks that occupy our
attention. The whole point of this place existing, this gathering of
human beings on this particular patch of hillside, is to realize the
Dhamma---to let go of greed, hatred, and delusion. That's the reason
we're here. Our preparations for the Observance Day and the day itself
are all meant to help us to remember, *Oh, right, that's what it's all
for, of course. Why was I forgetting that?* That's the purpose of all
the construction projects and committees. That's why we take care of
these duties and keep the place clean and tidy. That's what it's
for---the realization of Dhamma.

# Stopping the Papañca Mill

## Ajahn Amaro

### 08-27-08

*Papañca*, a favorite theme of Ajahn Pasanno's*,*is that stream of
incessant thinking, the flood of conceptual proliferation that the mind
can so easily bring up. This produces an endless chatter of
commentating, fretting, recollecting, re-creating, planning, and
imagining. The Buddha pointed to three particular qualities which are
the driving forces behind these processes: craving, conceit, and
views---the *papañca* *dhammas*. In the Anattalakkhana Sutta---*the
Discourse on the Characteristic of Not-Self*---he outlined these
qualities in very simple terms. *Taṇhā* or craving is defined as *etaṁ*
*mama:* *This is mine. This belongs to me. This is my ladder, my
chopping board, my space.* Next there's *eso'hamasmi*: the conceit "I
am." *This is what I am. I am a person, I am tall, I am short, I am a
woman, I am a man, I am old, I am young, I am a monk, I am a layperson.
I am.* And lastly, there are views: *eso* *me* *attā: This is myself.
This is me. This is my true nature.*

These are straightforward ways to define the forces that cause so much
chaos in our lives and so many difficulties in our minds. The mind takes
a simple perception with a given activity*---*walking along a path,
picking up a length of pipe, chopping up some carrots, putting one's
things away in a room, or any of the hundred little tasks of the
day*---*and then runs with it: *This is what I'm doing. This is mine.
Those are not his. Who's moved my shoes?* Or it identifies with ideas
about who we are, for instance that we're weaker than others: *I'm
pretty feeble, not nearly as strong as I used to be.* The mind takes
simple feelings and perceptions, these habits of possessiveness and
identification, and uses them to fuel what we see, hear, smell, taste,
touch, and think, the objects of our six sense bases.
Then*---*whoosh!---off it all goes. The papañca erupts.

I often think of it like a mill. The papañca dhammas*,*possessiveness
and identification, are like the engine that keeps the mill churning. We
simply feed into the mill the objects of the six sense bases. And out of
it pours papañca, the endless flow of mental chatter. We need to pay
attention to the engine, to turn it off or stop giving it fuel, rather
than getting lost in the stream of mental chatter*---*the commenting,
regretting, planning, and inflating that goes on. Then the whole thing
gets a lot quieter and more peaceful. The mind can clearly be aware of
the present without creating this whole welter of confusion around it.

So that's why it's very helpful that the Buddha pointed out these simple
flags we can use to recognize when we're fueling the mill of papañca. If
the mind is saying, *This is mine, this belongs to me, and that's
yours,*if it's saying, *This is what I am, this is absolutely me and
truly who and what I am,* that's the signal to let go, to not get caught
in that process, and to bring more spaciousness to the mind. As soon as
the mind says, *That's mine, that's yours, I wish I had one of those,
I'm like this, he's like that---*that's the time to get suspicious. See
the draw, the pull of that. We use the quality of mindfulness to notice
the me-mine-yours flags and choose not to buy into them, not to fuel the
engine.

When we're mindfully carrying out our tasks for the day, engaging with
each other, functioning together as a community, dealing skillfully with
what we see, hear, smell, taste, touch, and think, then the papañca mill
engine doesn't have any fuel. It has nothing to power it. It simply sits
there and causes no trouble. If we make the simple resolution to be
mindful and apply effort to see how these papañca dhammas operate, and
if we train ourselves not to buy into the I-making my-making process,
then we can save ourselves a great deal of difficulty. Life becomes far
more harmonious and less complicated, and we can experience how pleasant
and peaceful the mind can be.

# Non-contention Is Full Awareness

## Ajahn Amaro

### 12-08-02

Under the Bodhi tree the Buddha's response to death---in the form of
Māra's threats, cajolings, temptations, and attempts to cause
doubts---was not life-affirmation, going into deep *jhāna* to evade
Māra, blasting him with a *vajra* bolt, trying to be reasonable and
negotiate on Māra's terms, or trying to justify himself. Instead, the
Buddha's response was a fearless wakefulness. Almost invariably,
throughout the accounts of the Buddha's meetings with Māra, as soon as
he is aware of the malefactor's presence, he says: "I know you, Māra."
And the game is over.

Maybe this is a myth or maybe not, but such tales maintain their power
through their congruity with truth as we experience it. When Māra knows
the Buddha has seen the hook inside the bait, he knows his victim is not
going to bite. Māra is defeated in that gesture of knowing. This
suggests that the opposite of death is not birth, life-affirmation, or
the destruction of death, but rather, the opposite of death is
wakefulness.

Perhaps the most meaningful way of considering the encounters between
the Buddha and Māra is to regard them as depicting the arising of
unwholesome, ego-based states in the mind of the Buddha. They portray
the instinctual fears, doubts, and desires that arise, but have no place
to land. When using the myth as a map of our own psyches, Māra
represents our ego-death experiences---loneliness, anger, obsessiveness,
greed, doubt---and the Buddha's example points the way for our hearts to
respond most skillfully, with a wise, wakeful, and radical
non-contention. For as soon as we contend against death we've bought
into Māra's value system and bitten his hook---when we hate and fear
death, or want to swamp it with life, Māra has won. We have "gone over
to Māra's side and the Evil One can do with [us] as he likes" (SN
35.115). We can perhaps run with his line for a while, but sooner or
later Māra's going to reel us in.

Non-contention is not a passivity, a denial, or a switching off---numbly
suffering the slings and arrows as they thump into us. Rather,
non-contention is full awareness. The Buddha doesn't say "It's okay
Māra, do your worst, I won't stand in your way." No, the point is to
defeat Māra---but the way we defeat him is by not contending against
him. In one of the most often quoted passages of the Dhammapada, the
Buddha states, "Hatred does not cease by hatred, but by love alone. This
is an eternal truth."

# Santuṭṭhi and the Meaning of Contentment

## Ajahn Amaro

### 12-02-08

Contentment, or santuṭṭhi, is often talked about in the context of
material possessions, particularly in our reflections on the four
requisites of robes, alms-food, lodging, and medicine. It's the quality
of being content with whatever is offered---the food that's presented to
us each day, whatever shelter is available to us for one night, and
whatever robes and medicine are accessible to us. That's an important
aspect of contentment, and a very grounding one---to have few material
needs and few material possessions. There's a story about a man who
found everyone of his possessions torched in a large bonfire. All that
remained were some ashes and the buckles from his boots. His response
was, "Well, good, now I don't have to bother with all that stuff
anymore." This is what it means to be content with what we have---doing
without if need be or living in our dwelling places with the thought
that it is only a roof over our head for one night. This is our
training.

It's also important to consider how santuṭṭhi permeates all aspects of
the path. It's not solely a matter of renunciation, or not being moved
by desire, agitation, or fear in terms of material things or how we
relate to other people. Contentment is also the basis for concentration,
samādhi---that quality of being content with this moment, this breath,
this footstep, this feeling in the knee, this sound in the room, this
quality of mood. To be content with just this moment is of enormous
importance in terms of samādhi, concentration. And if there's
discontent---I have to become more concentrated, gain more insight, be
more comfortable, I have to, I have to---then even though we may be well
intentioned, discontent continually creates a cause for agitation and a
lack of focus. As a result, samādhi is far away.

The quality of contentment can drift off in certain ways. It can turn
into dullness or laziness, or an urge to switch off, while at the same
time we're thinking of ourselves as being content. Actually, we're
simply steering the mind towards numbness, a non-feeling state, or a
feeling of wanting to getting rid of, not bothering with. That's not
contentment. And contentment isn't a quality of begrudging resignation.
Oh well, I'm stuck with this mood, this particular problem or feeling.
I'll just grit my teeth and bear it. I'll just wait for this to be over.
This is merely dullness, a nihilistic attitude. By contrast, when we are
content, there is a bright, radiant quality present. Contentment has a
great lightness and clarity to it.

Contentment can also drift off in the opposite direction, into
complacency, self-satisfaction, being pleased with ourselves. I'm fine.
I don't need to do anything with my mind. Everything is perfect. That's
taking it too far in the opposite direction. Contentment is a bright and
energetic state, but it's also free from self-view and
self-centeredness. It's not colored by an I-me-mine attitude.

Santuṭṭhi is not only a basis for samādhi, but also for vipassanā,
insight. It's the ability to be content with seeing this feeling, this
thought, this mood, or this memory as a pattern of nature. We're not
buying into it, trying to read a story into it, or claiming it as self
or other. Contentment allows us to leave things alone. A painful memory
arises, does its thing, and ceases. An exciting fantasy arises, does its
thing, and ceases. An important responsibility arises, does its thing,
and ceases. That's it. This is a characteristic of contentment, we're
able to leave things alone. The saṅkhāras, the patterns of the
world---we can let them be. It's not because we're switching off, we
don't care, or we're resentfully resigned to some situation. Rather,
it's a gentleness and presence of mind, a sense of the fullness of
being. We're not needing to extract something from this thought, this
feeling, this moment, or this experience.

Vipassanā is based on being able to attend simply to the process of an
experience, rather than buying into its content. This requires restraint
and, in particular, sense restraint: not maneuvering to get more in the
way of our requisites, not getting fussy and picky in terms of robes,
food, shelter, or medicine. It's very basic. But the things we learn on
such a basic, material level reach right to the core of our training,
our spiritual practices, and the development of insight. It's the same
with the quality of contentment---being at ease, tapping into the
fullness of Dhamma, the completeness of Dhamma. It's always here because
contentment is related to the quality of wholeness. It reflects the
wholeness and the completeness of Dhamma. Nothing is missing, nothing
needs adding or taking away. Knowing this, we can be content with the
way things are.

# The Real World

## Ajahn Amaro

### 10-21-09

What does a Buddhist monk know about the real world, anyway? It's a
common question because there's a sense of the monastery being an
isolated sanctuary where we say, "Good-bye cruel world," and then come
into our beautiful, sacred space, and suddenly we're spiritual. That's a
bit of a sweeping generalization, but it's often the way people think.
What is a monastery? What is the purpose of a sanctuary like Abhayagiri?
And what is the "real world?" Anyone who has stayed here for more than a
few hours realizes that far from getting away from the real world,
monastery life is designed to be a place where we meet that world---the
real world of our own perceptions, preferences, fears, desires, and
opinions.

Even those of us here might think, *Oh, there are so many difficulties
in the world---social stresses, problems of climate change, the
collapsing economy, so many suffering beings in the world. What am I
doing in a monastery? How am I helping? Am I just trying to hide away
from the real world?*Those are reasonable questions. But what we find at
the monastery is that because there is a meeting with the real world of
our own minds and bodies and the physical reality of our existence, we
are, in an important way, more genuinely engaged with the real world
than when we're running around outside. The blur of activity in an
ordinary, everyday life, even when it is involved with compassionate and
beneficial activity, can also entail being disconnected both from
oneself and those around oneself.

Living in the monastery and undertaking monastic training is about
bringing our attention to ordinary everyday activities. The way we
carefully put two pieces of PVC pipe together, chop an onion, clear a
trail, or edit a Dhamma talk, and the way we carefully bring our
attention to each of those activities---attuning the mind to the present
moment---is what creates a sacred space. That is what makes this place a
monastery, rather than an aggregation of individuals following their own
wishes, opinions, and habits. Sanctuaries such as this are a tremendous
benefit and blessing to the world, because they let people know there
are places where others will not lie to them, try to cheat them, try to
flirt with them, get money from them, or wish them harm. This is a
tremendous gift.

We may ask ourselves, *How am I helping the world by chopping onions or
pruning branches on the trail?* When a reasonable doubt like that arises,
it's important to realize that the intention to bring mindfulness, care,
and the cultivation of unselfish conduct into these simple and
apparently insignificant acts is a way in which we *are* helping the
world. The very fact that this monastery exists at all, with a couple
dozen people choosing to live and train themselves in this way---it does
have an effect. It is a beneficial and guiding presence in people's
lives all over the planet and is truly something in which to rejoice.

# Death and the Nature of Waves

## Ajahn Amaro

### 11-14-08

We received news yesterday from Kondañña's partner that he's fading
rapidly. He's in a hospice in San Francisco. Jay passed away a few days
ago. Ajahn Karuṇadhammo is having surgery today. While we were sitting
this morning after doing the *paritta* chanting for Ajahn Karuṇadhammo
and Kondañña, an image came to mind of different waves coming in from
the ocean and moving toward the shore. There's the wave named Jay,
having reached the shore and broken up, and the Kondañña wave, a wave
moving steadily toward the shore. Similarly, with Ajahn Karuṇadhammo and
all the rest of us, there are these little waves on the great ocean of
nature, steadily, inexorably moving toward the shore. They sustain a
form for a particular time---what we call Jay or whatever---they move
along picking up material, and finally reach the shore and disperse.
These energy waves flow through the oceans of the world. When they reach
the beach, there's the sound of the waves crashing on the shore. And
then the energy disperses.

When we reflect on the imminence of death, it seems like such a dramatic
thing---a life coming to an end. It seems so personal. The Amaro wave
seems so different from the Pasanno wave, the Cunda wave, the Ṭhitapañño
wave. They all seem separate and different. But when we look at them
from a broader perspective, it's merely the same ocean of stuff, with
different patterns of energy moving through it. The waves have a certain
coherence, a certain individuality that's apparent. But there's no need
to get excited about this wave versus that wave, to worry about which
one is closer to the shore, or to think that anything desperately bad
has happened when a wave reaches the shore. It's simply what waves do.
That's their ultimate destination, their nature. Their energy disperses.

Sickness and death are very much in our consciousness these days. Ajahn
Karuṇadhammo going under the knife, Ajahn Toon passing away, Jay passing
away, and Kondañña in his last days. So this is a good time to cultivate
a sense of knowing the nature of waves, and to look upon our own lives
and the lives of others with the same kind of equanimity and evenness.
We're simply watching the ocean doing its thing. Waves forming, flowing
in, breaking on the shore, washing out. That's it, no big deal.

We can also reflect on the distinctions between our lives and the lives
of others, those we know and those we don't know. We can see how
different textures of feeling can gather around particular waves. They
seem so important because there's a name for each wave, the name of
someone close to us. But the knowing quality within us reflects that
it's just another wave. How could it be so different or special---even
when it has our own name on it? This body, these aches and pains, these
ailments, this lifespan. There's that knowing within us which can
realize, *Well, it's not such a big deal. Waves rise up, they move, they
break. That's it, no big thing.* We have the ability to discover that
quality of evenness, steadiness, and balance. We can have an unshakable
and profoundly stable equanimity which is undisturbed in the midst of
all that arises, moves toward the shore, and disperses.

\

