# Brightening the Mind

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 08-19-12

Recent discussions and Dhamma talk reflections have focused on the theme
of right effort. Many of us can be so caught up in what we think of as
Dhamma practice or meditation practice that we create a narrow focus for
ourselves. Several of us here came to Buddhism with a focus on the
practice of meditation in the context of silent retreat, oftentimes with
a very specific technique related to quieting the mind. Sometimes it's
easy to get the idea that Buddhist practice boils down to right
concentration or a specific meditation method. But the Buddha's Eight
Fold Path is much broader than that. Right effort, one of these path
factors, is a significant skill to be developed. With right effort, we
are learning to be sensitive to the effect our minds have on what it is
we're doing. We are examining and asking ourselves, *Are wholesome
states increasing or unwholesome states decreasing?* That's our
benchmark. That's our measure of whatever it is we're doing in what we
call our Buddhist practice.

For instance, the theme today for Upāsikā Day, "Brightening the Mind,"
focuses on the formal side of meditation, which is often---but not
explicitly---talked about in terms of contemplation. There are many
kinds of active reflections the Buddha gave to help prepare, brighten,
and soften the mind. And by building on those qualities we can develop
more refined states of concentration. So that is our orientation---to
learn how to develop and prepare the mind, not only with formal
meditation practice, but also in our daily activities.

The rest of the path is oriented toward the other supports and
developments of right view and the attitudes and actions that are part
and parcel of our practice to liberate the mind. We follow this path by
paying attention to whatever it is we are doing, in the livelihood we've
chosen and in the activities and various ways we express ourselves in
body, speech, and mind. We can ask ourselves if what we are doing or
thinking is leading toward wholesome states of mind---toward more peace,
contentment, and satisfaction, or toward less stress, suffering,
clinging, and holding on to unskillful habits of responding in the
world. We can use that as the benchmark around all of our activities,
everything we do. This in turn allows us to let go of the belief that
meditation or practice is something we do only after our activities are
done, when we get up to our kuṭis or find a place to sit quietly. We are
gaining insight into the perspective that it's all practice right here
and right now, toward the increasing of wholesome mind states and the
decreasing of the unwholesome ones.

# Practicing With the Five Hindrances

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 12-20-12

In our Dhamma practice, many of us work will with the five hindrances
throughout the day---sensual desire, aversion, sloth and torpor,
restlessness and worry, and doubt. It is helpful to pay attention to
these hindrances and work with them because they are not only an
obstruction when we sit in meditation, they're also concrete
manifestations of the underlying tendencies: greed, hatred, and
delusion. These are the tendencies that keep us moving through
*saṃsāra*, cyclical rebirth. By examining the hindrances, we can see how
these underlying tendencies manifest themselves in our daily lives. They
tend to be more obvious to us if we are accustomed to them and start to
work with them in a constructive way.

As Dhamma practitioners, we sometimes may think that our sole purpose is
to be mindful of a particular state of mind that is occurring for us.
This paradigm is correct in some ways, but not complete. We may think
that if we're aware of being with a mind state then that alone is
sufficient to deal with it. In other words, if we know that it's there,
then, presumably, we can watch its rising, its maintaining, and its
cessation. This is a primary skill in our practice we need to develop: a
straightforward, nonjudgmental awareness of a particular mind state.

However, there are also concrete and applicable antidotes we can use to
work with the hindrances. In the Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta, the Buddha said
that the five hindrances are to be known like all the other objects of
mindfulness. In addition to knowing, we can reflect on how an unarisen
hindrance arises, how we can deal with a hindrance that's already
arisen, and how we can prevent its future arising. It's more than bare
noting of a particular hindrance---we are learning more about it: how it
comes to be, what encourages it, what nourishes it, and what denourishes
it. We can understand how to work with it in a real, active sense when
it's overwhelming and doesn't respond to bare attention.

It's a significant part of our practice to know how to recognize the
hindrances. Although we probably have experienced most of them many
times, we can have particular tendencies in regards to which ones we
move to first. We might tend toward escaping from discomfort by using
sensual gratification and indulgence. Or we may react to challenging
situations with immediate irritation by using a verbal retort or with
resistance by having an internal sense of heating up. Likewise, we may
become confused and doubtful or shut everything out by annihilating
ourselves with sleep or worry and become restless and anxious.

We take note of where our buttons get pushed and the responses that tend
to be most habitual, and start working with these aspects throughout the
day. We do this to help prevent the hindrances from arising. One of the
ways this is done is by working with a hindrance before it has arisen in
the mind. For example, with aversion or irritation, we learn how to
develop its antidote: loving-kindness. By developing loving-kindness, we
are increasing its strength and availability so we can access it any
time we need to use it.

As we become more familiar with our tool bag of antidotes, we weaken and
diminish the power the hindrances have over us. ""We can therefore feel
more confident and proficient in dealing with them so that we are not so
easily blown off course.

# Can't We Always Be on Retreat?

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 04-06-13

We're still in the process of coming off our three-month retreat and
adjusting to the different pace, level of energy, and engagement. I've
been reflecting on some of the words I've heard from others and what I
sometimes hear in my own head: *Why can't we always be on retreat? Why
can't we always live this particular way? Can't we slow down and have
more space and time for formal practice in the day?* The logical answer
is there's a monastery that needs maintaining. All the buildings we live
in and the different things we need as requisites have to be looked
after. That's the logical reason. If we didn't have Abhayagiri, we
wouldn't have any place for retreat. So we all need to pitch in and
help.

We're working on a greater perspective, a long-term goal in this
practice, and our abilities to realize peace of mind need to be ones
that aren't dependent on specific circumstances. We need to be able to
develop mindfulness, clarity, and ease of living in whatever situation
we find ourselves, whether it's retreat, engagement, work, or community.
We're developing an all-encompassing freedom that can be realized in any
circumstance, whether in quietude or engagement. One of the qualities
that's so important in developing this is patience---not to expect big
realizations or quick understanding. This is a gradual path and requires
a tremendous amount of patience. It's not the kind of patience where we
grit our teeth and simply bear with it, but rather, it is a spacious,
wide-open acceptance of the way things are.

I remember as a very junior monk, a time when I had some difficult
interactions with another community member. I was trying to strategize
how to better cope with it and more skillfully handle the situation
because there was a lot of frustration and anger arising in me. I tried
the usual antidote, developing loving-kindness, but it wasn't working
because there was a sense of resistance, strain, and aversion with
trying to get rid of the particular circumstance. I realized that more
important than directly responding with loving-kindness was cultivating
a sense of patience---both for this other person and for myself---while
I tried to develop the skills needed to handle and cope with the
situation. Practicing with patience helped me see more clearly what my
expectations were. It allowed me to be more open and I sensed, *Okay,
this is deeply ingrained in me and it's going to take some time. It's
not always going to be pleasant, but I need to open myself up to the
circumstances and be a bit more spacious with it.*

That's what the quality of patience is all about. It's not a quality of
gritting one's teeth and bearing with the circumstance until things get
better, or bearing through the next nine months until we get three more
months of retreat. It's about opening to one's experience and developing
a sense of clarity and understanding that this is a long-term process.
The more we can be patient with ourselves and with the practice in our
living situations, the more we can open to whatever it is that comes our
way and use it as a tool for learning about ourselves.

# Straightforward and Gentle in Speech

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 04-15-13

Many of our teachers, especially in the West, speak about the need to
adapt to modern circumstances while continuing to adhere to principles.
One of these principles is concerned with wholesome and unwholesome
courses of action---right speech. I was thinking about the need for us
to adapt to different circumstances and cultures when we interact and
converse. An example of this might be seen in the communication
differences between monastics in a new Western monastery and in a
monastery in Thailand. We have a high level of engagement here at
Abhayagiri, due at least partially to the nature of building a monastery
and trying to form a community. There tends to be more interaction and
speech during work periods and sometimes this requires quick
communication while we are attending to our chores. With this type of
communication there is a necessity for being mindful with our speech. We
need to be careful how we apply the guidelines of right speech and
interact with each other in thoughtful and caring ways.

A line that comes to mind is in the Mettā Sutta, "straightforward and
gentle in speech"---it's a combination of two different actions. We
aren't just straightforward but also gentle, nor are we merely gentle;
we need to be straightforward. It's both qualities at the same time.
This is often not an easy task---it takes a tremendous amount of skill
and mindfulness to be straightforward and gentle simultaneously. It's
easy to become straightforward when there is something we think is
wrong, something we think should be done in a particular way, when we're
in a rush to finish, or a previous interaction has led to some
negativity. We can easily be straightforward in those circumstances and
not consider the more gentle approach. During those times we can blurt
something out that is a bit too aggressive, demanding, harsh, or simply
not considerate. When we are speaking, it's important to monitor our
energy so that we are communicating what needs to be communicated in a
straightforward, clear manner while also remaining aware of the
energetic impact of such speech---how what we say might affect the
people around us. We can consider the impact a gentle quality has on
communication, thinking, *How would I like this message delivered to me
if I were on the receiving end?*

Conversely, people can be overly concerned about how something is
communicated because they do not want to upset anyone, cause any
discord, or are afraid of someone's reaction. When this occurs, the
message may be delivered in a way that is indirect, uncertain, or not
straightforward at all and therefore, the content of what is being said
and its meaning is misunderstood. Perhaps one is communicating out of
fear---afraid to speak up in a situation where someone needs a clear
statement. We can end up being imprecise or ambiguous, thinking that
we've communicated a message, but the other person has not heard a word
of what needed to be said.

Being able to combine clarity, honesty, gentleness, and kindness to what
we say is a skill that requires a lot of attention and work. We are
learning to consider both how our speech is delivered and how it will be
received. I find for myself that it's an ongoing exercise of making
mistakes and learning, going back and apologizing, and if necessary,
re-clarifying what it was I was trying to say in the first place. It's a
meaningful and significant part of the practice and something that I
believe is at the core of our daily lives.

# The Impact of Right Speech

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 04-26-12

There are three ways we act on the inclinations, impulses, and
intentions that come through the mind and this is through body, speech,
or mind. In a monastery, where there are many restraints on our
activities, we can particularly notice the action of speech. Because
actions and ideas are often expressed through speech, it's good to focus
attention on this habit so we can learn about ourselves through our
speech patterns. In the monastery we attempt to speak not only the
truth, but to also speak without anger, without talebearing, and without
frivolous or unnecessary speech. Overall, people do a good job with the
practice of right speech. However, speech is a difficult area of
practice, and wrong speech can come out unexpectedly.

We come to the monastery with speech habits formed through family
upbringing and the company we've kept. In Western cultures there can be
an encouragement for people to express their thoughts openly, without
considering how it might affect other people. This conditioning can
manifest in speech indicative of trying to get ones way or get what one
wants or being overly persistent. We can also express frustration,
impress people, or present ourselves in certain ways that might be
different from how we really are.

These habits in our minds can easily influence the speech we use in the
monastery and it can take constant vigilance to restrain ourselves from
speaking in unskillful ways. Sometimes it's appropriate to say nothing,
as when practicing noble silence. But at other times in a monastery
there is a need for communication. We need to talk with each other to
engender a sense of communal living and support as well as maintain
harmony and well-being. If something needs to be communicated or
somebody needs support, then skillful speech is appropriately
encouraged. Nevertheless, we must watch the underlying impulse or mood
in the mind that serves as the basis for speech. It's important to be
careful with our speech because people are sensitive and regrets can
arise when others are hurt through the use of wrong speech. The Mettā
Sutta suggests that we be not only straightforward in speech, but gentle
as well. Even if our speech is true, we must be mindful of the impact
our words have in a community as well as when we are engaging in the
world outside of the monastery.

# This Is Who I Am

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 04-27-13

Before the work meeting, a few of us were talking about different kinds
of characteristics, traits, and qualities we each have and how easy it
is to indulge in our personal attributes. Some people are good
visualizers and can easily create certain kinds of images in their
heads. Others can remember music. I was reflecting how easy it is to
take those characteristics that are an integral part of each of us and
pick them up in a way that makes us think that's who we are. Whether
it's positive qualities or whether it's negative qualities, we come into
the world with these attributes based on past actions and past habitual
conditioning. Whatever they are, we easily identify with them and
believe that's who we are: *I'm a person who has abilities in
construction, carpentry, computers, or whatever our skills are* or, *I'm
a person who has a lot of anger, sensual desire, fear, anxiety.* We take
these different kinds of qualities we experience throughout our lives
and personalize them, creating an image of ourselves in our own minds.

We do the same with other people. We see certain qualities,
characteristics, or habits so we identify a person as a particular type
or someone who always has a certain characteristic. He's an angry person
or she's a person who has a lot of sensual desire. Even if we're smart
enough and know about Buddhist practice to the extent we don't really
believe that's who we or they are, for the most part that's still how we
operate. We continue to go through our daily activities, seeing the
world of ourselves and the world outside through that perceptual lens of
good and bad qualities. To counter this tendency, we persist in chipping
away at that sense of solidity, that sense of a permanent self.

Every time we find ourselves lamenting over an unskillful quality or
habit we have or puffing ourselves up thinking we're exceptionally good
in some area, it's important to keep reflecting, *Well, that's not
really who I am.* These are just qualities that come from
conditioning---sometimes through skillful attention, sometimes through
unskillful attention, and they're essentially a conglomeration of images
and ideas that have formed into the perception: *This is who I am.* Try
to see them objectively as conditioned qualities and don't take
ownership. By recognizing this constant change and flow of
characteristics moving through consciousness we can see clearly that we
are merely holding onto shadows. We can learn not to hold onto these
characteristics so tightly, and watch them arise and cease, realizing
their conditioned nature. If we can see little bits and pieces of how
these different characteristics are dependently arising based on causes
and conditions, then that strong and limiting sense of self starts to
slowly disintegrate. Through this process we can understand that we
aren't bound by the sense of me, mine, myself---the sense of entrapped
solidity. It's good to bring this up as a recollection moving throughout
the day, letting go little by little, and not feeling so entangled by
our images and perceptions.

# Being Willing to Make Mistakes

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 05-08-13

How much are we willing to learn from our mistakes? This is a crucial
aspect of the training---the willingness to recognize when we've missed
the mark, being open to making mistakes. It's not always easy to
practice in this way. I think many of us here come with conditioning
around how important it is to be right all the time. We can grow up with
a sense of shame---*Unless I'm doing everything perfectly all the time,
then something is wrong with me.* As far as I can tell, there are only a
few lucky people who learned while growing up that it's just fine to
make mistakes. In the community here, there are many of us who are
strong-willed in certain ways. We have plenty of leaders here and
sometimes it can be difficult for us to break that classic paradigm,
*The way I think we should do it is the right way.*

How we begin to unravel this paradigm is by learning it's okay not to be
right all the time, and to use honest self-appraisal to look at
ourselves. This allows us to say *Okay, perhaps since everybody else is
doing it a different way, I need to consider that or A number of people
are indicating to me that I may have missed the mark---maybe I should
think carefully about what happened.* This is a sign of internal
strength. I also believe highly realized people tend to take this
approach as well. Those who have penetrated the perception of not-self
can see there is no "me" or "myself" that needs defending. They know
it's not a problem if they're not always right.

This comes down to a matter of skill. Either it's a skill we've learned,
or one we haven't, or perhaps we've partially taken it on---but it's
nothing personal. As Luang Por Pasanno was saying, even the Buddha after
his enlightenment was constantly readjusting. Sometimes he'd set down
rules, only to realize later they needed to be changed. In those cases
he would call the monks together, explain the need to alter a rule, and
adjust it accordingly. Right after his enlightenment, the Buddha was
inclined not to teach. As the story goes, the Brahmā God Sahampati
realized this was the Buddha's inclination, came down from the brahmā
realm, appeared before the Buddha and said, "Please reconsider this:
There are those who can learn!" The Buddha thought, *Maybe there is a
possibility of teaching others how to realize what I have realized. So
even at that point he readjusted, and he certainly didn't take it
personally.*

This is a good reflection to bring to mind. Essentially, it's a reminder
to be honest with ourselves---whether it's relating to community life,
the monastic discipline, the training, the views and opinions about how
things should be done, or one's personal meditation practice---we can
strive for a more open and balanced point of view. We do this by
honestly looking at our internal experiences, allowing ourselves to be
present with our fears of being wrong, and saying to ourselves, *Okay, I
need to make a change; I need to adjust.* And then simply let it go and
make the adjustment. Once that's done and the change has been made, we
can move on and not worry about it so much.

# Mindfulness of Death, Appreciation for Life

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 05-14-13

Luang Por Pasanno mentioned that Debbie's mother is going to be signing
into the palliative and hospice care programs because her condition is
deteriorating. I would think Debbie has been practicing with death
contemplation as this is happening, particularly after she lost her
sister-in-law a few months ago. The Buddha encouraged us to reflect
daily and remind ourselves that death can come at any time. It's easy to
externalize, *It's happening to somebody else, not me.* But at some
point, it won't be somebody else, it will be us and it would be nice to
think that we are ready for it when it comes. This isn't meant to be a
morbid reflection, but more an encouragement to contemplate death,
bringing us closer to the reality of it and encouraging a sense of
heedfulness and urgency in the practice.

It's so easy to get lost in the tasks of the day, particularly as we are
about to launch into a work period. I would imagine that a significant
number people, right now, are thinking about the tasks they need to do.
I find myself doing that sometimes as well. But we can pull back a bit
and remind ourselves, *Hold on a second, life is precious. I don't know
when or how I'm going to die. If death occurred for me right now, would
I be ready for it? Would there be remorse? Are there things that I have
done or left undone that I would regret if I died today?* We can take a
few moments to contemplate the potential immediacy of death and see what
this might bring up for us. Contemplating death in this way allows us to
clarify what is precious in our lives which frees us from the tendency
to get lost in the details. And this in turn helps us focus on what our
priorities are. So instead of death contemplation producing a negative
feeling such as fear or bewilderment, we can be moved to a sense of
lightness and release as we focus on what is most important to us. And a
life well lived, focused on what is most meaningful for us, has the
greater potential to be a life free of regret and remorse.

Death is a present-moment experience; it's not in the future. When the
moment of death arrives, it will be just that moment---everything before
that moment of death is still life, with all of its projections, worries
and fears, including the fear of that approaching death. But when death
actually occurs, it is just one brief moment. So, at the moment of
death, death is now. Before that moment, it is just a projection. With
contemplation of death we become more familiar with this inevitable
ending so that when it finally comes, we are prepared for it, neither
afraid of or confused with this very ordinary present-moment experience.

If we keep that in mind then we do not really have any other option than
to contemplate what's going on for us right here and right now. It's the
only place we are going to be ready when it's time for the body to move
on, for the elements to dissolve. For most of us, one of the best ways
to do this is by using mindfulness of the body. We can notice the
position of the body, the posture of the body---standing, walking,
sitting, and lying down. This is the most basic contemplation of the
body and we can maintain it when we are doing just about
anything---constantly coming back and asking ourselves, *What is the
posture of the body? What is the disposition of the body? If it's
moving, how is it moving through space?* We can know what's happening
with the arms, the legs, the head, the torso, and be present with the
body. We can also incorporate the mood of the mind---*What's the mood
like right here and right now?* If we keep on attending to right here
and right now as we go through our daily activities, then when it comes
time for death to greet us, we will be ready right there and right then
to be aware of the event as it happens. Bringing mindfulness right here
and right now and reminding ourselves of the preciousness of this human
life is a great way of reducing fear and anxiety and establishing a
sense of purpose along the path.

# You're a Warrior Aren't You?

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 05-29-13

Last night we had a discussion about the power of practicing in
community. One of the things I remember fondly about an experience in
community was during my third vassa away at Chithurst. When I first
arrived, I was trying to get my bearings and slowly familiarizing myself
with some of the community members. One of the monks, who was just
junior to me, sat on my left and I noticed after a number of weeks he
wasn't engaging or making any contact. He was very quiet and reserved. I
didn't know what to make of it. It was several weeks later that I began
to think, *Well, perhaps he just doesn't like me or maybe I said
something in the beginning that disturbed him.* At one point only he and
I were in the day room resting after the meal. He had yet to say
anything to me the entire time since I had arrived. I was sitting on one
side of the room and he was sitting on the other and he broke into
conversation saying: "You're a warrior."

I thought, *What? What does he mean?* so I said to him, "What?"

He replied, "You're a warrior, aren't you?"

I thought to myself, *Well, I've never thought of myself as a warrior.*
So I asked him: "What do you mean? Why do you say that I'm a warrior?"

He replied back to me, "Well I know, because I'm a warrior too."

I thought, *What's going on in this guy's mind?* Again I said, "What do
you mean?"

He responded, "Well, I can see that you warry a lot. And I know that
because I warry a lot too."

I thought, *Okay, now this makes sense---I'd forgotten for a moment that
I was in England and things like "worry" are pronounced a bit
differently.* This monk went on to explain that he had been suspicious
of me for the first few weeks because I was an American and he had many
different preconceptions of what Americans were like and did not want to
get too close or engage. As it turned out, we became good friends over
the year and appreciated each others company.

Last night here at the monastery, we were talking about living in
community---the effect people have on us and how, particularly as
Westerners, we have a strong individual self-identity and therefore
construct so much dukkha around that identity. With this individualism
in our culture, we don't have a lot of experience living in community
nor do we understand the benefits of living with and learning from other
people in this way. Ajahn Chah's training heavily emphasized the power
of living in community. It can be difficult to live this way because we
all come from diverse backgrounds and have our different habits and ways
of being in the world. But this kind of interaction, living and working
with other people twenty-four hours a day, is a powerful practice.

I also briefly stayed at Amaravati during that same year. In the
Amaravati kitchen, there was a vegetable-peeling machine that consisted
of a big drum with a rough surface on the inside where vegetables
whirled around. Carrots or potatoes were thrown into this machine and
they banged up against each other and against the rough surface of the
drum until all the skins were peeled off. When I first saw this I
thought, *Wow, this is just what living in community is like.* Part of
it is the process of constantly being in a close living environment with
other people until over time all the rough edges are worn down through
interaction and give and take. There aren't a lot of people who would
willingly throw themselves into a situation like a vegetable peeler, but
that's basically what we have done here in the monastery.

There's a strength and power that we build up from engaging in formal
meditation practice, being on our own, and establishing a sense of
solitude. And this is, of course, important in the Forest tradition. But
it's good to ask ourselves, *How much self-concern and self-identity can
be let go of, worked with, and honed down through the practice of being
in community?* As individuals, we really aren't as important as we think
we are. All the mistakes we make, the expectations we have of ourselves
and other people, the difficulties, criticisms of others, criticisms of
ourselves---all of these rough edges need to be acknowledged and seen
for what they are. This acknowledgment and understanding can't take
place if we don't have that kind of bump and grind with other people to
help expose those rough edges. It's not easy---none of the practice is
that easy---but we learn to whittle away the rough edges through the use
of community and through self-reflection about how we are engaging in
community. We do this by letting go of the expectations for ourselves or
other people to be a particular way. It's a powerful practice to
establish a state of mind that is not so self-involved. When we talk
about the practice of letting go of the ego, the self-identity, I think
we need to reflect on the importance of communal life and how lucky we
are to have it. While we are living with others we can depend on that
structure of support and make full use of it.

# Letting Go and Picking Up

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 06-14-13

Many of the practices we hear and read about in our tradition are
focused on the process of letting go---how we let go of our habits and
tendencies, as well as objects of mind. We do this to dwell in and
experience the pure state of awareness that comes from not grasping or
holding onto anything. This is the ultimate practice on the path:
letting go of negative tendencies and at the end of the practice, a
complete release, a complete letting go of everything, including the
path that has taken us there.

I think it is also true that a substantial amount of the practice---if
not all of the practice before completely letting go---also involves
picking up. We learn this skill by discerning what it is we need to let
go of and what it is we need to pick up and engage with. All the
obstructions and hindrances to meditation---negative thoughts, reactions
out of anger, greed, or confusion---are habits that, with mindfulness we
see arise in our minds and then let go of to the best of our abilities.

In the same process so much of the path is involved with skillfully
picking up different positive qualities---the habits of generosity,
renunciation, energy, patience, truthfulness, determination; the
practices of virtue; the sublime states of mind: loving-kindness,
compassion, sympathetic joy, equanimity---all of these are using an
object that we are picking up, and at least temporarily, holding onto.
Our learning consists of understanding which different types of mind
states we can access, which ones we want to let go of, and which ones we
want to develop further. Letting go and picking up often go hand-in-hand
so that as we begin to recognize a difficult mind state, such as anger
arising, we realize it's something we want to let go of while at the
same time---even simultaneously---we recognize something like patient
endurance that needs to be picked up. For example, if a difficult
situation arises, such as a when a challenging person comes into our
life, we can let go as we recognize the tendency to react out of anger
while at the same time, we can pick up, develop, and nurture patience,
the determination not to react, and kindness for the other person and
for ourselves.

This morning I noticed one of the people in the meditation hall gently
removing a spider from the room. How many people in the world will go to
great pains to take a spider out of a room and set it free? Most of the
time it's a quick stomping of the foot and that's it. This is something
to pick up on, this type of sensitivity and caring for even the smallest
of creatures. We can think of it as picking up a skillful mind habit.
All of these actions have an impact on the mind and the heart. In our
daily lives, we can explore what it is that's helpful for us to pick up,
nurture, and engage with, as well as what habits we can develop that
will support us in our practice.

# The Whole of the Holy Life

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 06-22-13

With many people away, it's so quiet I can hear the water dripping over
the sound of our breathing. We can have our own little retreat here
today, which is the way it should be all the time. We can use every
opportunity to practice mindfulness---to be aware of where our body is
and what our mind is doing and ask ourselves, *Is this a skillful state
of mind or is it an unskillful state of mind? Am I distracted? Am I in
touch? Am I so absorbed in what I'm doing that I am not really seeing
what's going on with the people around me?*

The title of Luang Por Pasanno's daylong retreat at Spirit Rock today is
"The Whole of the Path: the Fruits of Spiritual Friendship." Many people
know the sutta where Ānanda says to the Buddha, "The Saṅgha is half of
the holy life," and the Buddha replies, "Don't say that Ānanda; it's the
whole of the holy life." The opportunity to practice with people is one
of the unique features of our community. Where would we be if we didn't
have support from people when we are having difficulties or the feedback
from people when we are missing the mark? The qualities of mindfulness,
self-awareness, and sensitivity to other people are strengthened with
the reflective guidance of spiritual friendship. Many of us are in need
of individualized guidance for our training, and we support each other
in this. We embody the sense of community and the sense of care and
concern for each other. This is where the fruits of living in a
community can truly be seen, especially in juxtaposition to people who
lack support and have difficulties going it alone.

It can sometimes be challenging to rejoice in and take advantage of the
opportunity to practice within a community. Because of this, it is
useful to remind ourselves that it may not be here forever.
Circumstances change, communities change, and we never know where we are
going to find ourselves next. If we keep this in mind, we can use the
opportunity we have here to be sensitive to each other, mindful around
one another, orient ourselves to our present experience and feel a sense
of appreciation for the community we live in.

# Spacious Practice

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 06-28-13

Having a sense of spaciousness is an important quality to look after in
one's meditation practice. It's easy to become contracted and narrow in
what we focus on, particularly during the work period when we can be
quite involved with the task at hand. During this time we can easily
remain involved, absorbed, enmeshed, and identified with the work we're
doing. While intense focus like this can serve a purpose, the
cultivation of an open and spacious mind can help keep this focus in the
context of practice. This is talked about in certain meditation circles
as keeping a "broad choiceless awareness." It's a concept that is quite
useful, but often misinterpreted. I've always appreciated Luang Por
Pasanno's description of an unfocused spaciousness of mind as a nebulous
nothingness that we are *not* trying to cultivate. We are not striving
for spaciness, because spaciousness is different from that. This quality
of space and being open carries with it a sense of alertness,
attentiveness, and clear comprehension. Spaciousness doesn't mean that
we drift, totally object-less---it's important we still maintain a frame
of reference while we open up to that space.

This is quite a useful quality to cultivate. It's easy to get involved
in our mental worlds but we can take the opportunity, even while working
or walking from one place to another, to broaden the focus a bit. This
helps to create a little more space in the mind and body without
drifting off into a nether world. It reminds me of something Ajahn
Sumedho used to say, possibly quoting Ajahn Chah: "Oftentimes we think
of the mind as being within the body. We have this body and inside it is
the mind. But it may be even more skillful to consider that the body is
in the mind." So with that broad, spacious, relaxed, open awareness we
can keep the object of attention on the body itself, and see that the
body is contained within that awareness. That's a good focus to maintain
in the forest---walking up and down the trails, walking from one work
site to another, or when we are doing anything using our bodies---we can
tune into a relaxed, open, state of awareness. In this way we're not
closed in on our mental worlds, but rather holding very clearly in our
minds the object of the body moving through space. It may be a simple
object, but it's one that keeps us tuned into the present moment, and
helps us avoid the experience of drifting into spaciness.

This broadness of mind is also useful in sitting meditation---keeping
the breath within that spacious context of an expansive awareness. We
can pick up and cultivate any object within that spaciousness. For
example, when cultivating the brahmavihāras, the qualities of
loving-kindness, compassion, altruistic joy, and equanimity, the states
of mind that are talked about as boundless, we can establish that sense
of an open and expansive mind, even before we start to pick up one of
the brahmavihāras. That provides a broad, open container for the
brahmavihāras where they can be developed. With any object we are
developing, we can bring this spacious quality into our daily activities
by establishing an open, easeful sense of the mind, and a broad
awareness that is alert and attentive to what it is that is happening in
the present moment.

# Reflecting on Interdependence

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 07-05-13

In recent years there's been a modern Western interpretation of
dependent co-arising that's derived from an explanation of the
interdependence in the world, with the people in it being interconnected
in a vast web of cause-and-effect relationships and experience---"It's
all connected" as people like to say. There's a belief that there's no
type of action or activity in the world that doesn't have some sort of
effect on the whole of existence, all action and interaction. This isn't
a very accurate representation of what the Buddha's teaching on
dependent origination is all about. It's actually pretty far from what
the Buddha taught. Dependent origination is a teaching about how
ignorance conditions the arising of suffering and all the various
factors involved as well as the cessation of that entire process.

Nevertheless, the idea of interdependence is something that can be
helpful to contemplate because even though it may not be valid in terms
of dependent origination, it has a truth to it. We're very much affected
by each other, dependent on each other, and influence each other, and
we're inexplicably woven together through the various forces of kamma in
our cyclical existence in *saṁsāra*. With this, there are all the
various ways that kamma works itself out that we don't really understand
and can't possibly comprehend because it's so complicated. We find
ourselves weaving through many, many lifetimes, receiving the results of
our past actions, being involved with each other over and over again,
and bound together in our commonality as beings coursing through
saṁsāra.

We don't know exactly how that process works, but it is possible to
understand that each of our rebirths in saṁsāra depends on our
relationships with other people and, for better or for worse, how we
respond to situations and the qualities we develop in relationship to
each other. Due to causes and conditions, skillful actions and
intentions that have been put in place by us in our past lives, by some
fortunate set of incredible circumstances---some might call it a
miracle---we find ourselves existing in the same space and time, right
here and now, practicing with each other in this vast web of existence.
So we need to ask ourselves, *How well are we spending our time?*

I think it's important to reflect on that because it points out how much
we need to rise up to this circumstance we find ourselves in and take
responsibility for what we are doing right now, acknowledging what it's
taken for us to get here and not wasting this precious opportunity. It's
so unusual for us to all be here together with a strong interest in
practicing the Dhamma---it's not a widespread inclination that's
happening in the world. Perhaps there are small pockets of it here or
there but by and large it's an incredibly rare opportunity. We can do
our best to take full advantage of this situation because this life is
short and we don't know exactly where we're going to end up the next
time around. We keep the momentum going by cultivating the wholesome and
skillful qualities we want to bring with us so these qualities carry on
into the future in case we don't finish our work in this lifetime.

All of the wholesome intentions we cultivate now will condition what
happens for us the next time around and, most importantly, will
condition the quality of our lives right here and right now. We are
working on letting go of unskillful tendencies, the aversion, greed,
self-interest, and selfishness and cultivating qualities of virtue and
generosity, to make a commitment to ending the cycle of suffering.
That's how we can increase the potential of being in association with
like-minded people in lifetimes to come. This is the meaning of true
interdependence.

# Physical Therapy for the Mind

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 07-18-13

Recently I've made visits to a physical therapist because I have some
ongoing muscle issues that have plagued me for the last twenty years.
Often, this type of situation originates with a small abnormality that
causes pain and many people will subconsciously allow the body to adjust
to it or slump in a certain way to relieve that pain. Although this
gives temporary relief, it turns out that people have adjusted their
posture in a way that ends up perpetuating the problem. Then they adjust
a small amount more to relieve more pain when it returns and, not too
long after, they find themselves misaligned. All of the small
adjustments they've made while seeking temporary relief simply do not
take care of the condition. They're left with a posture that is
unbalanced and it places additional stress on the bones, muscles, and
connective tissues that are responsible for good alignment. The only way
to correct the condition is to incorporate appropriate physical therapy
and exercise to address all of the changes that have taken place over
the years. The body is so accustomed to coping with the condition in a
particular manner that they have to unlearn those coping strategies and
go through some conscious discomfort to begin achieving the goal of
long-term healing.

I thought about this in line with how the mind works, the way we usually
buy into our moods, both the positive and the negative ones. We find
ourselves swinging back and forth in a yo-yo-like manner being drawn to
and believing in the salvation of our positive moods and then, when they
fade, reacting quite aversively to the negative ones. We can end up
getting lost in the entire process. Each time we respond by moving
toward an enjoyable mood or away from a disagreeable one, we're seeking
a temporary solution to a long-term problem. The solution is having a
sense of equanimity so that we are not constantly buying into and
reacting to these different moods that pass through the mind.

This is similar to the way habits develop in the body. In the mind, an
event happens, it triggers a perception---a habitual way of looking at
an experience. That reminds us of something similar in the past and we
react in the same way through either aversion or attraction. Something
can be unpleasant---a difficult situation that causes discomfort,
unpleasantness, or aversion---and if we react to it automatically based
on a past perception, it then reinforces the tendency to buy into old
ways of reacting negatively. On the other hand, if it's something we are
desirous of or excited about, that reinforces the tendency to go for it.
Over time, we develop specific temporary coping strategies and react
automatically in certain ways. We say, do, or think something, or we may
internalize the experience with anger, blame, self-criticism, greed,
fear, or confusion. Every time these coping strategies arise, they
reinforce the original pattern that began the process in the first
place. They seem to give some temporary relief for a period of time, but
in the long run, they simply don't do the trick to relieve us of
long-term suffering and pain.

Before those automatic responses come into play, we can spend time at
the level of perception and feeling, using mindfulness and clear
comprehension to observe the response as it is occurring. We do this by
allowing ourselves to experience the discomfort of an unskillful habit
as we get to know and examine our reactions. This helps us refrain from
automatically repeating the same old pattern. It also gives us time to
respond with more wisdom and skillfulness based on having seen and
understood the reaction clearly. As it holds true with physical therapy
for the body, we can unlearn habits that have caused long-term
unwholesome reactions in the mind. We just need to be willing to pause
and observe the space around our uncomfortable experiences.

# What Do We Take With Us?

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 08-02-13

We can take this moment to let the momentum of planning for the morning
settle before launching into the day. Watch the mind that's leaping
forward to go and accomplish the tasks, to start the workday, to do what
needs to be done. Watch the momentum of becoming---identifying with the
various activities we're about to perform and the roles that we
have---the ideas, thoughts, views, opinions, perceptions, conceptions.
Watch how we identify with the activities and emotions of the mind.

A couple days ago I was visiting a woman who is in the process of dying.
She probably doesn't have too much longer to go. She's someone who has
always wanted to live life fully, being involved and engaged with many
different good things. Like most of us, she's strongly identified with
that and does not want to look closely at the dying process, at death,
or at what that means. When I saw her, she was at a point where her body
was not responding to her wishes to keep it going. She wanted to
continue living life fully engaged, doing all the things that she was
finding a lot of gratification with in a very wholesome way, but her
body was going counter to that. It was saying to her: "I'm packing it
in" and it was no longer going to be a viable vehicle for living life
fully. She is realizing all of this now.

When we have such a strong impulse toward becoming, identifying closely
with the body, and then all of a sudden we're faced with the dying
process---the body going in the opposite direction, the direction of
non-becoming---then we can experience a very sudden wake-up call. The
momentum of the mind toward using the body as a vehicle for
identification, for becoming, for gratification is ripped out from
underneath us when the dying process begins. What a lesson this can be
for all of us.

This is why the Buddha suggested the contemplation of death as a
necessary reflection for us. It helps uproot that sense of
identification and impulse toward becoming what it is we think we are,
who we think we are, what we identify with, whether it's with our
bodies, our activities, or our roles in the monastery. In the ordination
process here, when we're a long-term lay resident in the monastery, we
look forward to becoming an anāgārika. When we're an anāgārika, we look
very forward to becoming a sāmaṇera. When we're a sāmaṇera we look
forward to becoming a bhikkhu. Then, when we're a bhikkhu, we look
forward to becoming an ajahn. And then ... we're almost dead.

What is it that we can take with us? We can't take any of those
identities or roles. We can't take any of the accomplishments with us or
our failures. We can't take any of the praise that we've received for
things that we've done well or the blame that we've received for things
that we haven't done well. Whatever we have gained or lost doesn't go
with us when we die. All of the status that we've accumulated, all of
our particular views about the way that things should be run, all of the
times we were able to be alone, wanting to escape from being around
others, or all of the times we sought the company of others, being
surrounded by family and friends---we don't take any of those with us;
they all disappear when we die. All we take with us are the impulses and
the tendencies we have toward either skillful states of mind like
generosity, morality, and patience (three of the pāramī) or the more
unskillful impulses of greed, hatred, and delusion. These tendencies, in
as much as we develop them, are taken with us, but we don't take any of
the other things that we generally hold to as so important or permanent.

So throughout the day, what is it that we want to develop? If we're
going to die tonight, what qualities do we want to take with us? Do we
want to take the becoming tendencies, the activities, the momentum of
tasks, identities and roles, how we think we are, how we want to be seen
by other people, or how we present ourselves to the world? Do we want to
work on those? Or do we want to work on developing the essential aspects
of our practice: service, kindness, impulses of skillfulness, wisdom,
discernment, patience, energy? Those are the qualities we can take with
us. The choice is up to us. We can choose those skillful tendencies
leading us toward seeing this process of becoming, seeing how we
identify with the body, and then learning how to let go. Or, we can go
in the opposite direction. It all depends on where we focus our
attention as we move throughout the day.

# Cāga: Giving Up

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 08-04-12

I was listening to Ajahn Yatiko give out the work assignments and
observing how he adjusted midcourse as he received information about all
the people who were or weren't here and who did or didn't do a
particular task. It was easy to marvel at the flexibility and ease he
conveyed as he juggled around in his mind what was going to take place
with the complicated work assignments and multiple tasks.

I remember when I was the work monk for a few months. It wouldn't be
impolite to say that it was a disaster. At least that's what it felt
like to me. Hearing Ajahn Yatiko just now, I was reflecting on the
different ways that people offer themselves and the different skills
they have. There is an impulse to give, to serve, to offer oneself to
the community in whatever way one can.

During my retreat, I spent some time reflecting on the theme of giving.
In the Pāḷi language there are a couple of different words used for
giving. There is *dāna*, generosity or giving, and *cāga*, which has a
broader scope than generosity. Cāga refers to the aspect of giving as
well, but it can be used more with the tone of giving over, giving to
something, or giving up in terms of relinquishment. There is a sense of
handing over or giving toward some higher ideal that can manifest in
many ways. We can give up a material object as an offering with a sense
of selflessness. This might be an object we like or something we would
like to keep, but for the sake or benefit of somebody else we give it
over to someone. With cāga, when we give, it is not with a feeling of
loss but rather with a feeling of fulfillment. There is a sense that we
are getting more from giving up, from relinquishing than from holding
on.

In our daily lives and in the monastery we give up time to people, give
up self-concern and ask ourselves, *What can I do to make life a little
bit easier or a little more pleasant for somebody else?* We may see that
someone is overworked or overstretched in what they are doing and we
keep our eyes open for the opportunity to make a gesture of giving. For
the residents here, it might mean that we don't go up to our *kuṭis* for
another fifteen minutes while we help somebody do something, giving up
what we would like to do for the benefit of somebody else.

There is a story from the suttas about three monks who are all
practicing well and living harmoniously. When questioned by the Buddha
about this, one of the monks explains that his success is due to asking
himself, *Why should I not set aside what I wish to do and do what these
venerable ones wish to do?*

We can also think about cāga in regard to our views and opinions. This
is a monastery with a lot of independent-minded folks, some of whom have
strong personalities (I put myself in that category). There can
sometimes be a sense that I know the best way to do something, therefore
that is the way we should do it. It can be a real workout to notice that
inclination, suspend it, and acknowledge that even if we are right,
maybe it's not the best way to proceed. There are many collective ways
that we do things in the monastery, and even if we don't agree with
them, we can acknowledge we have a common agreement to do as the group
does and let go of our views and opinions about the matter. This is what
we all signed up for. We operate in a container, the monastery, that has
a fair number of protocols. In this way we give ourselves over to the
community in the form of cāga, maintaining harmony even if it means
letting go of some of our views and opinions.

On a more transcendent level, we are giving up and giving over to the
Dhamma, relinquishing to the practice and the training for the
realization the Buddha talks about as the endpoint of our practice.
Whatever it is that we find we are holding to, clinging to, adhering to,
we meet with an attitude of cāga, of giving up, giving over, and
relinquishing. It can be a formidable task to let go because we often
hold onto our old habits of finding temporary happiness in temporary
things. We give up those tendencies for the benefit of having a
long-term sense of satisfaction and completion. Cāga is one of those
qualities that leads to satisfaction, and we can develop it in ways
toward ultimate realization.

# Deconstructing Personas

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 08-05-13

Recently I've been reflecting on the ways we project ourselves to the
world, and the relief that comes when we set these projections down.
Many of us feel the need to constantly create a persona based on either
how we think we should be, or how we want others to view us. If we can
get an idea of how that process occurs, then we have the potential to
catch it in its tracks. By noticing this fabrication before it becomes
too involved or too set in, we're able to use reflection to let it
deconstruct. The less we try to create a sense of who we are, or who we
want people to see us as, then the more natural and at ease we can be.

Earlier I suggested seeing if walking meditation could be used as a
reflection---walking back and forth with the thought in mind:*I don't
have to be anybody right now.* By doing this for a short period of time,
we are planting the seed that may help us stop creating an identity to
present to the world. Instead of forming that identity, we simply see,
if even for a finger snap, what it's like to no longer create that image
in our minds.

When there is a period where we don't need to think too hard---moving
from one place to another, in a moment of transition or while getting up
to go to the bathroom during the work period---whatever mundane activity
it may be, we can notice this. We can ask ourselves, *Can I drop this
created image of being somebody who's operating in the world? Could I at
least notice whether or not I'm holding this perception of a person who
behaves in a certain way---with a role, a purpose, an image or
projection of a solid independent individual?* Then try to let go of
that created self-image for just a moment, see what it might feel like.
Feel the sense of relief and ease that arises when it's simply a few
body parts and a few stray thoughts moving through space and time.

# Whose Is This?

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 08-18-13

A few days ago I noticed that just above the door of my kuṭi, there is a
large colony of yellow jackets that has decided to make its home under
my roof. Yellow jackets are notoriously territorial. As the summer
continues on and becomes hotter and drier, there is less food and as the
colony size grows the wasps tend to get more and more aggressive. I have
been stung by yellow jackets in the past and their stings can be pretty
painful. Given these circumstances I knew that I needed to take care of
the situation. The first thoughts that went through my mind when I
initially saw them were: *They are in my kuṭi. This is my kuṭi and they
shouldn't be there. I need to do something to get them out.*

I tried to figure out a way to do that so that they would be deterred,
but not harmed. I thought I could accomplish this by spraying them with
water, albeit from a good distance. It seemed to me that would aggravate
them enough so they would leave their nest long enough for me to take it
down and move it further away. I've sprayed them a number of times over
the past few days and it does, indeed, stir them up. In fact, a couple
of them have found me more than twenty feet away and I've been stung
twice. After the first couple of days observing them in their
territorial and protective nature, I was reminded of how really foolish
it is to have any sense of ownership around "my kuṭi." It's likely that
their sense of possession is even stronger than mine to the point of
aggressively defending their position. For them it is "their kuṭi," not
mine, and they are simply defending their territory against me. This is
another reminder of the sense of ownership and control we have, the
sense we have of being the center of experience and generally the center
of the universe. We tend to carry this sense around with us most of the
time.

So it's beneficial to pose these questions to ourselves: T*o whom does
this belong? To whom does this kuṭi belong? To whom does this monastery
belong?* The other night in Vinaya class we were talking about the
ownership of property, especially as it pertains to monks. We say the
Abhayagiri Monastic Corporation owns the property of the monastery.
Well, does it really? What about all the other beings that exist in the
buildings? They probably have a sense that they own the whole monastery.

This feeling of ownership also extends to all of the things that give us
a sense of who we are, particularly the human body. We tend to think of
this body as "my body, my foot, my knee, my back," and do what is
necessary to defend ourselves against all of the situations that might
come and threaten the body. We treat illnesses and we take care of
whatever has befallen us with a sense of possession, a sense that this
has happened to "my body." We take antibiotics or put on different
ointments and salves to defend the body against all of the organisms
that are taking over. But the millions of organisms that live in our
bodies may think this body is theirs (if they do think). It's helpful to
ask ourselves: *Whose body is this? Whose feelings are these? Whose
thoughts are these? Whose opinions are these? Whose neuroses are these?
Whose problems are these?* We have such a strong sense of ownership
around all of this. We hope to do whatever is possible to reasonably
maximize comfort and skillfulness, yet, if we have a sense of personal
attachment, personal identity to any of this, then at some point when
things change, we are bound to suffer.

This is a reflection we can keep in mind as we practice throughout the
day. Even though we spend a lot of time developing skillful means and
use a fair amount of intention and will, we need to ask ourselves, *Who
is in charge? Whose is this? To whom does this all belong?* We don't
have to come to any specific logical conclusions. These questions are
asked to open up a space for uncertainty and they help us see our bodies
as changing phenomena over which we truly do not have any ultimate
control.

# Punching the Clock

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 08-20-13

It's easy to slip into a preprogrammed mode, flowing through the day on
automatic pilot, especially when we're organizing our tasks for the day
and engaging during the work period. Whether it's in the office, the
kitchen, or out in the forest, we usually know what our tasks are and
can click into autopilot mode quite easily. We can become completely
absorbed in our activities---identified with them, or with being the
doer of particular tasks. This is when mindfulness, clear comprehension,
attention, and alertness can all lapse. The goal of the practice and of
the contemplative lifestyle in general isn't simply to go to work in the
morning, punch the time clock, and mentally check out. Nor is it helpful
to take the view that when the work is out of the way, then it's time to
practice. Instead, as much as possible, we are looking for a continuity
of mindfulness and clarity throughout all of our activities and that
means bringing to mind a suitable object for focusing one's
attention---that's what mindfulness is. We choose a wholesome object for
this, one that will lead to skillful states of mind. Sometimes that's
difficult, especially if we are doing work that requires us to be
mentally focused. I think office work is among the most challenging in
this regard, but it can be just as challenging out in the field if we
find ourselves needing to think and plan for things. That's
understandable and to be expected, but we try and attend to our duties
with a sense of lightness and clarity. When tough moments arise,
particularly if we are doing physical work, then we put effort into
recollecting what we are doing in the moment. We can know our physical
sensations clearly, and focus on something that will lead to a wholesome
mind state, rather than a deluded one.

We keep the focus on the body, always here in the present moment. This
is easier to do during physical work, as we can notice the very simple,
basic, and uncomplicated position of our bodies, and remain attentive to
the movements as they occur. This is described in the Satipaṭṭhāna
Sutta: knowing whether we are sitting, standing, walking, or lying down.
Noticing the basic posture of our bodies is something we can do right
now. As we walk, we can pay closer attention to whether we're looking
forward, looking back, extending or contracting our arms. We can also
see movement from one position to another, squatting, kneeling,
hammering, typing on a computer, or even turning to answer the phone.
It's simply a practice of giving attention to the basic movements of the
body as a way of grounding oneself in mindfulness. This way of
practicing has the potential to lead to a sense of settledness in the
mind and the body. It helps keep us from becoming completely, 100
percent swept away with what we are doing, and allows us to maintain a
bit of objectivity moment by moment. We do this by building up a
momentum of pauses, stopping every now and again and feeling the
presence of the body. In the long run, if we are able to successfully
practice with continuity and consistency, when the time has come to set
down the task at hand, mindfulness and clarity come up---replacing the
old habits of exhaustion, confusion, and the need to distract oneself in
order to replenish drained energy. When we learn to sustain mindfulness
for longer periods of time, we can have a sense of awareness and
comprehension about what we are doing in the context of our Dhamma
practice. We do this by taking the time to reflect on our experiences as
they occur within this context. All of this arises from developing the
skill of mindfully observing the body without allowing ourselves to
drift off into our automatic, unconscious daily routines.

# Where Did It All Go?

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 08-23-12

Today is Beth's birthday. We were talking a few minutes ago about how
quickly it all happens, how fast the time passes, particularly as one
gets older. Time tends to telescope and move much faster with age. Beth
mentioned her mother was recently looking in a shop and saw a reflection
in the window. Her first thought was, *Who is that old lady?* Then she
realized that it was herself! I remember a time when I was about ten
years old and thought to myself, *Wow, in the year 2000 I'll be
forty-five years old.* All of these experiences of time are very
malleable and fleeting.

We can use this perception of time as a reminder that the life that we
have is a certain length and we don't know how long it's going to be. It
may not last beyond the next few minutes or it may go on for many, many
years from now. The point is that we don't know. For most of the time in
our lives we are either thinking about the past or projecting into the
future. We miss the point that it's all happening right here in this
moment.

So we need to use a sense of urgency, knowing there is an aging process,
illness, and death. And we don't know when illness and death will occur.
We only know that it will occur at some point in time. With this type of
reflection we can develop a sense of urgency to encourage our minds to
dwell in the present because the present is where we have the ability to
change and create favorable conditions for the development of our minds.
It's not thinking about the past, having regrets about the past, or
making projections into the future; it's about responding to what comes
our way right here and right now in this very moment. Of course, it's
easy to believe our thoughts, *Well, the time isn't quite right. Maybe
when the conditions are better I'll start practicing seriously. I have
plenty of time left and there's just too many responsibilities right now
and too many goals I have to accomplish. As soon as I get this part of
my life together then I'll really be able to practice.* But that's a
kind of false thinking that we get ourselves into. It's a misperception
that we're going to have all that time when the conditions are perfect,
because the conditions are never going to be perfect. We have to take
the opportunity right here and right now to take what's coming our way
and work very closely with greed, hatred, and delusion.

It's not as if we're trying to create a different person in the future
who will then be more skilled and capable, *If only I didn't have so
much anger or craving ... I'll work on that so in the future I will
become somebody who can be much more free.* While it is true that things
develop over time, it is the effort we put forth right here and right
now, seeing our reactions and habits just as they arise that allows us
to change our perceptions and understand our human experience. If we
keep on putting it off or spend time regretting all the things we did in
the past or project into the future without paying attention to right
here and now, then we've missed the opportunity to make a genuine change
in our present experience. Realization and genuine shifts of perspective
don't occur somewhere off in the distant future. They occur right now in
this moment.

# Mindfulness and Concentration

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 08-29-12

Yesterday, at teatime we were talking about right concentration, *sammā*
*samādhi*. One of the guests staying here had a question about
mindfulness versus concentration. It's a good subject to reflect on
because we can sometimes be hard on ourselves when we are trying to
concentrate our minds and the practice and doesn't feel like it's going
so well. This can happen when we have some fixed ideas about the nature
of concentration. As Luang Por Pasanno says, even the word
"concentration," taken by itself has a connotation of a narrow focus
that's exclusive of other experience. He used an analogy between this
tray here and samādhi. The tray is a good example of samādhi in that we
need a firm foundation and the glass on the tray doesn't form a strong
base like the tray does. In samādhi we are looking for a tray rather
than a glass. After he explained this---a few minutes later---the glass
spontaneously burst in front of us. I don't know if it was merely by
chance, but it was a well-timed example of the instability of that glass
samādhi.

It's good to keep in mind that sammā samādhi is dependent on and
supported by the right application of the other path factors,
specifically right mindfulness and right effort, but also all of the
other factors: right view, right intention, right action, right speech,
and right livelihood. All of those factors have to be in play for
samādhi to be right concentration. It is not independent of those other
factors and when we don't have significant amounts of time for intense,
long periods of formal sitting meditation, the work we do with the other
factors of the Eightfold Path forms that firm foundation, making it a
broad base of practice. To begin with, we have to have right view,
starting with the knowledge that the actions we take in body, speech,
and mind all have an effect in firming up that foundation and
establishing peace of mind. How we go through the day---the mindfulness
we have when walking, doing dishes, working outside, working in the
office and the attention we bring to what we're doing, even though it is
quite active and engaged---is helping to form that firm foundation.

When we skillfully practice the Dhamma all of those factors work closely
together and act as a base for that type of collectedness of mind. It's
not a forced activity. We engage throughout the day with all of the
other aspects of the Noble Eightfold Path to have more ability to enter
into a quiet, collected, enjoyable, peaceful state of mind. This
concentration is not a result of having to go into sensory deprivation
or exclusion of all experiences so we have a few moments of peace.
That's not the kind of samādhi that is going to be stable, long-lasting
or even enjoyable. When we go through periods of practice that don't
seem very fruitful or when we feel our minds will never settle down, we
can bring to mind that the sitting practice and development of
concentration is an important part of practice, but it's only one part
of the practice. It needs to be supported by and firmly grounded in the
other factors of the path as well.

# Our Changing Bodies

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 09-19-12

Some people here have recently experienced the death of someone close to
them. Also, a number of the community members here have experienced
minor injuries to joints, feet, and knees, as well as other illnesses
and maladies. When we reflect on the nature of our human bodies, we can
see these bodies aren't really under our control. They don't obey our
wishes, our wants, or our desires to be healthy and always comfortable.
They have their own quirks. Each one of our bodies has a particular set
of constituents, elements, and predispositions through kamma, biology,
and genetics. Each body is more or less following its own life, its own
course, and there is not a huge amount of control that we have over it.
We can try to influence it and try to give it proper nourishment and
support when we are ill, but by and large there is nothing we can do to
control its ultimate outcome. It will age. Along the way, it will
experience periods of health, periods of sickness, and eventually the
body will die. It is simply a part of nature. That's the way nature
works.

Look around at what is happening with plants and animals. All creatures
have their birth, their time of life, and their passing away. It's so
easy to get caught up in this process, to get caught up in the fear of
illness or injury. There can often be a lot of anxiety about how we
protect and care for the human body, not to mention the fear, anxiety,
and difficulties we experience from the death and dying process.

The hallmark of the Buddha's practice is to contemplate this reality so
that we can genuinely see, understand, and accept that it's all simply a
part of nature. If we look around we can see that there's nothing that
escapes this process. Gently, over time, we can apply this contemplation
to ourselves and to what we experience throughout the day. By gaining
insight into this process, we are able to live without a constant sense
of protection and anxiety in regard to this body, which is merely
following its own course. We look after ourselves in reasonable ways but
without attachment or clinging to a sense that *This is who I am; this
is myself*. The body is basically a set of elements that is constantly,
changing, moving, evolving, and transforming just like the world around
us.

# Death at a Distance

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 10-11-13

The contemplations of old age, sickness, and death are themes that seem
to be repeating themselves these days. Iris's recent diagnosis of lung
cancer is just one example. Based on my own experience of having been a
nurse, it is interesting to see how the mind immediately moves toward
the technical aspects of the illness: *What kind of tumor is it? What is
the staging? What are the treatment options? What are the services that
are available?* This is all based on my conditioning and background.
Then sometimes, I move into: *How is this for Iris? What is she going
through? What kind of resources does it take to deal with this kind of
information? How is she coping with this? What can I do to help her? How
can I be most attentive without being overly solicitous?*

I recognize, both in myself and others, that this kind of speculation
and questioning are expressions of a truly noble concern for what Iris's
experience may be like and how we want to help. In some ways though, as
we try to help we can take the focus off our own experiences and put off
the need to reflect on ourselves. Many of the Buddha's teachings
encourage us to pay attention to and contemplate the body in terms of
aging, sickness, and death, especially as these subjects relate to
ourselves. Nonetheless, it is difficult to acknowledge this until we
find ourselves experiencing this on a personal level. So, we continue to
think about that other person and her problem, hoping that by
externalizing it in those noble ways, we might somehow be able keep old
age, sickness, and death at a distance.

How can we internalize these thoughts? How can we remind ourselves that
old age, sickness, and death is about me? We can say things to ourselves
like: *This will happen to me sometime in the future.* But that is
another great way of putting a bit of a distance between ourselves and
reality. What we need to do is adjust our views so we can see that not
only is this happening out there to other people, or have some vague
notion of it occurring in the future for ourselves, but right now, *This
is my body that is aging and there might actually be something happening
to me now, in the present.* Then what does that mean? How should we
contemplate that? This body is incredibly sensitive and fragile. We can
be sensitive to the feelings of the body, the sensations, and come to
understand the body as a sensitive and fragile condition of elements
brought together by natural factors. It's an exceptionally delicate
balance which can be lost at any moment. Just as Iris has a tumor in her
lungs and tumors throughout her body, we can imagine that happening in
our own bodies and take it to heart.

Try to do that as a daily reflection. If we are frequently able to bring
this perception to mind, then the more real it will become for us.
Paradoxically, this reflection can bring up a sense of ease and calm.
This settled quality arises from insight into the characteristics of
*anicca*and *anattā,*impermanence and not-self. Both characteristics
become more apparent and real so that when serious illness or imminent
death approaches there will be a familiarity with the nature of one's
finite existence. The more those familiar feelings can be brought in,
the less fear there is around letting go of that which really isn't ours
to hold onto in the first place.

# What the Body is Supposed to Do

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 10-15-13

I remember the first experiences Luang Por Liem had with his heart
difficulties in Thailand. Apparently the condition had been going on for
quite some time. He had symptoms of fatigue and probably shortness of
breath among other things. It wasn't until it was quite progressed that
he did anything about it. When asked why it took him so long to look
into it, his response was something like: "I thought this was what the
body was supposed to do." That's the nature of the body, isn't it? And
even if we do fix something in the body, something else is bound to
eventually break.

All of the things that happen to us that we think shouldn't happen are
simply reflective of the way *saṁsāra* is. It wouldn't be saṁsāra if
things were always going perfectly. By the mere existence of saṁsāra, we
know that everything in the material world, the realm of the human body
or psyche is going to either break, change, or deteriorate according to
certain laws of biology and kamma. These are natural laws that create
the flow of arising and passing away. If we reflect, we can see how our
expectations take us in a direction that sometimes leads to dukkha. For
example, we get "the" diagnosis and we think, *Why me? I've done
everything right. It's too soon. Why should this happen? Going to
doctors and having treatments isn't what I was planning to do for the
next few months or years!* We can feel extremely agitated and afraid in
situations like this. Or maybe something in the material world breaks
and we really don't have time to deal with it---it feels frustrating.
All of us experience these kinds of things, but we try to keep in mind
and reflect that all of this---particularly the experience of old age,
sickness, and death---is what we should expect to have happen. In fact,
it's a miracle that it doesn't happen a lot sooner for most of us
because this body is in a very fragile condition. Ajahn Chah is quoted
as saying, "Everything we need to know can be learned from nature, if we
just watch and pay attention." Whether it's in the material, physical,
or mental realm, we can watch the nature of everything. We can see it
arise, have its own life, and then change and pass away. That's the
fundamental insight we need to have to truly understand saṁsāra and
eventually realize complete liberation.

# The Power of Speech

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 10-30-13

I was thinking about an aspect of our practice, right speech, and
reflecting on the power of speech to affect us all. In some ways it
affects us even more than bodily actions, which we think of as the
coarsest way of acting out a mental condition. Speech can have an even
broader effect because the number of people who can hear spoken words is
greater than the number of people who can observe somebody's bodily
action. Knowing how powerful it is, we need to put a great amount of
care and attention into our speech because it can impact each one of us
for better or for worse, depending on what is said. I believe that many
of us here have a keen intellect with well-developed mental faculties,
as well as the ability to rationalize and this often results in having
some fairly strong views and opinions. I see that in myself. If we
combine that with the ability to articulate, to put those ideas,
thoughts, and intellectual capacities into speech, the outcome is that
one has an extremely powerful tool. It is helpful for us to recognize
that power and the possibility of its ramifications.

Thinking historically, we see how one person in this past century with a
strong intellect and a powerful ability to articulate influenced an
entire culture to the point that even though he may not have personally
taken many lives himself, he was responsible for the destruction of six
million Jews and millions of other people. He also justified horrible
kinds of experimentation on human beings. All of this took place simply
because of the power of his intellect and speech.

Conversely, speech can be used on a mass scale for good. We realize this
when we look at our own teacher, the Buddha, who was able to use speech
for the benefit of many, many people and 2600 years later, this ability
to communicate and use speech effectively continues to have a strong
influence worldwide. For better or for worse, speech can be an
exceptionally powerful tool and here in our community, we need to be
aware that it can have a potent and long-lasting effect.

If we have a keen ability to think, rationalize, and analyze, as well as
the ability to articulate, it does not mean that our speech is always
free from defilement. With all of those qualities the underlying
negative tendencies can still be expressed. Sometimes we may feel a need
to prove something or to be correct, or feel that something must be done
in a certain way or try to position ourselves within the community in a
way that is promoting our views. Those kinds of tendencies are an
indication that we are not completely free of basic animal instincts.
Our brains may have well-developed cortices and speech centers but we
also have the lower functioning parts that are influenced by basic
unwholesome tendencies toward territory, ownership, and a sense of "me
and mine." These tendencies are still part of our cultural inheritance,
our kamma, and our biology. No matter how skilled we are with an ability
to speak, no matter how clever we are in the way we think and analyze,
these tendencies still come bubbling up.

We need to be aware of that and use our speech in a way that is
conducive to harmony, because we also have the ability to harmonize.
Think about how powerful it can be when there is a discussion here
centered on Dhamma or when somebody tries to articulate some harmonious
viewpoint, something that contributes to the welfare and well-being of
the community, or speech that is backed up with good intentions toward
kindness, support, clarification, and truth. We can put our focus there
and use the skills we have learned from practicing the Dhamma to check
our speech when kamma starts to bubble up. If a conversation is heading
in the wrong direction, then one needs to be able to stop it, change
direction, or withdraw if necessary. We can then move toward
establishing speech that is not only well expressed but speech that is
also grounded in kindness and an interest in supporting the welfare of
the whole community.

# Unplugged Realities

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 11-07-13

I recently came back from a one-week visit to Tisarana Monastery in
Ottawa, Canada to help them celebrate their kathina ceremony. During
this time I did a lot of traveling and spent some time in airports.
While I was en route I noticed the alarming amount of people who were
plugged into to one or another type of mobile device, either a
smartphone, tablet, or laptop. It was interesting to observe them as
each person seemed to be plugged into their own separate spheres or
realities. They weren't interacting with others around them and seemed
quite oblivious to what was happening in their surroundings.

One man I observed was conducting his business before boarding the
plane. I watched him making several calls and doing business over the
phone. He would talk, conclude a conversation, and begin another one. It
occurred to me how internally caught up he was in this reality of his,
this sphere of a world he created. As the announcements for the plane
departure began, it seemed that there was this subtle attention off in
one corner of his mind and he was able to be in touch with the fact that
he was about to board the plane. When it was his turn to board, he rose
up but continued to speak on the phone conducting business up until the
very last point that he sat down on the plane and had to put his phone
away.

I reflected upon this and thought about how, without cell phones or
portable computers, we do much of the same thing here in the monastery.
It is so easy to get caught up into our own realities and dwell in these
separate spheres, absorbed in what we think is some permanent condition
of the mind. We can get fixated upon some idea, mind state or concern we
have and not really see that it is changing phenomena. It could be
something like a health concern or some interaction we have with
someone, and we believe this reality is all that exists for us. Our
thoughts can revolve around this world to the degree that we are unable
to see outside of this closed perspective or view.

Then, without even noticing it, some action outside of us or something
someone says, completely distracts us from this world we have become so
absorbed in, and we are reborn into this new world without even
remembering what we were so obsessed with just moments ago. This new
reality becomes the focus of attention in a way that can prevent us from
seeing this entire process. It's as if we are jumping from one world to
the next with no fixed point of reference. We can be blown around by our
emotions, thoughts, and preoccupations about these insubstantial
experiences.

Even right now, as I end this talk, we are all going to get up, begin
cleaning dishes, and prepare for the work period. This will be a
completely different experience from what we are having right now. So if
we can be aware of this changing of worlds and not get so caught up with
it, then we have the opportunity to see this blinding process and wake
up to the understanding there is something outside of our very fixed
perspectives. We can learn to expand the view and have a spaciousness
that can encompass our experiences from a much broader context. By doing
this, we allow ourselves to see things quite differently from a less
absorbed and self-focused point of view. When we expand the view like
this, we have the opportunity to see how our minds are moving from one
reality to the next, creating world after world. We can step back from
that process and watch it from a centered but detached point of view.
When this occurs, there is the possibility of stopping, ending this
cycle of world hopping, and opening ourselves up to the reality of our
present experiences.

# A Lifetime of Maintenance

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 11-09-13

I was looking around the monastery thinking about the tasks that we have
today. I'm going to be working with a couple of other people checking
out our septic system, seeing what's going in and whether it is working
properly. We're also cleaning up different areas around the cloister. As
I was looking down at the cloister construction site, I saw dug-out
earth, cement, and rebar forming the foundation of what in the future
will be our reception hall building.

I was reflecting on the fact that people don't often think about, see,
or experience the underside of the monastery---the buildings,
operations, functions, and infrastructure. When we look at a building
that's completely built, like the monks utility building, we don't
automatically visualize or see the foundation, the earthwork, or the
dug-out area. We see the building itself that's structured on top of it.
When we're eating, washing dishes, and putting our bowls away, we don't
usually visualize the food that we eat eventually coming out of our
bodies and going into the septic system. There's the starting of
different projects and repairs, but we don't usually pay attention to
them once they've been completed. In thinking about the beginnings and
endings of these kinds of processes, what is it that we choose to
experience? We view the world from what's on the surface and what is
most pleasing to the eye. We selectively attune to that aspect of an
experience because that's what we want to see. It's naturally how we
live our lives.

For the most part, we do what we need to do to get through the day, but
we don't pay attention to the aspects of existence that are unpleasant,
unexciting, unattractive, tedious, routine, or mundane. We're usually
working and living our lives in a way that's trying to get through the
unpleasant and boring events, while at the same time looking forward to
the pleasant bits---"the good stuff."

As we are practicing, it can be helpful to pay attention to all of the
routine maintenance and tedious tasks that we engage in, from the
beginning of the day to the end of the day. Whether it's the areas where
we live, the physical surroundings, or whether it's our bodies, or our
minds, or the relationships we have with people---we are consistently
maintaining these structures. We tend to miss or skip over that whole
aspect of our daily lives---the routine maintenance. If we miss it, then
it's as if we are walking through a cloud. There is the intention of
experiencing the one or two moments that are exceptionally interesting,
exciting or pleasurable, but the rest of it is just a cloud. With
exception to the rare high and low spots, 90 percent of our lives are
the routine "in between" experiences. But if we can bring mindfulness to
the routine and mundane aspects of the day and not be so caught up in
doing something to get somewhere exciting in the future, then there's a
lot more peace and ease of mind and less desire momentum propelling us.
We can settle back into a recognition of simply being here right now
with whatever it is. And this is the most pleasant and peaceful abiding
we can have.

# Clinging to Solidity

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 11-10-12

Last night Ajahn Amaro shared some reflections around the theme of
transience and its relation to impermanence. After his talk I was
contemplating this theme, especially around the sense of permanence and
how we relate permanence to solidity. It is one of the fundamental
delusions we carry around with us much of the time and it forms the
basis for a false sense of self, a solid "me" in this body. The quality
of holding onto the perception of permanence is what leads to so much
distress and suffering. It's good to get an understanding of how to
bring that into conscious awareness as much as possible, not only in
meditation, but when moving through the day.

When we maintain the sense of apparent permanence or solidity, it
appears to be bound up with a fundamental motion of mind, the quality of
clinging. In the suttas, the classic approach to having insight into
this quality of clinging is by contemplating impermanence. This
contemplation can give rise to a sense of dispassion, disenchantment,
and can result in the ability to let go and release the clinging.

Alternatively, we can notice the sense of holding on to anything and use
that as a basis for letting go of the perception of permanence and
solidity. We then see how much difficulty it causes when we're involved
with work or interaction with people and there's this sense of holding
on. I find it useful to go directly to the mind-motion of holding onto
something and watch how it reinforces the sense of solidity, permanence,
and a false reality. When we cling or hold tightly to some notion or
opinion, as a result everything becomes more concrete, more focused on
the subject and object, more about "me"---more entangled and involved.

The views we cling to all tend to play with, feed on, and support each
other. We can attack them from different angles, whether it's directly
contemplating the transience of a particular situation or whether we can
see the clinging or holding onto something. In that process of
recognition, it's possible to realize, *I can drop this. I don't need to
hold onto this. I can let it go.* We might then notice the sense of ease
in the mind that comes when we are able to do that. We may also gain
insight into impermanence that appears right there, because if we don't
hold onto something then it just moves on by itself. As quickly as it
appears, it passes away, particularly in the realm of feelings,
perceptions, and moods. When we don't hold onto those experiences, we
see how quickly they change, morph, disappear, reappear, and disappear
again.

The perception of transience makes the process of going through life
much lighter; the burden doesn't have to be so heavy from holding on. So
we can practice that throughout the day, taking moments to stop, seeing
where there's holding and clinging, and then relaxing and letting go,
allowing things to move on in their own natural way. Through this
process we gain insight into the true nature of impermanence.

# Eye of the Hurricane

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 11-14-13

We have a full community once again. With all of the comings and goings,
right now there seems to be a confluence of comings---everybody is
present within the community for at least a little while. We also have a
fairly sizable group of long-term residents, visitors, and guests---more
people than we've been accustomed to in the past few weeks. Notice the
effect of that. Try to keep in mind the sense of being in a community
and learning from all the experiences of living with and relating to
different people. We work together, make decisions, offer suggestions,
receive suggestions, and experience the whole interplay of human
interaction. We can reflect on how to do this skillfully and remember
the importance of staying centered while in activity, trying not to let
the senses be pulled out in different directions. It helps to take a
moment and come back to the center of awareness in the body.

Many of us sometimes have a fantasy of being in total solitude and not
having to interact with other people. I know I sure do. Or we imagine
living in a small community with only one or two other people. However,
one of the advantages of living and working together in a sizable
community with a fair amount of engagement is the quality of learning
that takes place and the understanding we develop when we stay in the
center of awareness without being pulled out into many different
directions. It's like being in the eye of a hurricane where there are
very strong winds around us---winds that could cause anxiety, fear,
disturbance, or agitation. But right in the middle of the storm is the
eye where it is very calm and still. We can place ourselves in that
center so that we are alert and aware, where our senses are restrained
and not moving out. Within this center, there is a receptivity to what's
going on so that we are not totally isolated from the environment. We
can respond appropriately, but the attention stays focused, particularly
on the body. The body is the best place for maintaining that sense of
presence. So as we move through the day we can try to stay in the eye of
the hurricane.

# Contemplation of the Body

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 11-20-13

The age-old themes of the body and contemplation of the body are again
present for me. There is such a strong attachment to the body as self. I
see this with my own experience and with so many of us here. There are
those of us right now who are going in for physical exams, those with
ongoing health problems, the issues with our friend Iris who is dealing
with cancer, a number of people who need to see certain practitioners,
doctors, and therapists for body issues, and six people going in for
blood work tomorrow. We chanted the "Reflection on the Thirty-Two Parts
of the Body" this morning. We do this reflection and examine the body
because we are so strongly attached to it as either who I am, something
of which I am in possession of, or something over which I should have
control. It forms a major part of who we think we are, and because of
that strong attachment, when things go wrong we suffer greatly. That is
why a large part of the practice is to try, over and over again, to
alter that belief of the body being self or possessed by a self. If we
can lessen that attachment over time, little by little, when things go
wrong, we do what we need to do to take care of the health of our
bodies, but we don't do it with a sense of strong attachment,
identification, clinging, pain, sorrow, lamentation, or grief.

We can practice this on an intellectual level and that's where it has to
begin---bringing it in through the use of words and active reflection in
a conceptual way. Yet how many of us let it reach a deep level, an
emotional level, and possibly even further than that? Often, this level
of deep understanding doesn't become apparent until something very
serious happens. During those times we may come to understand that we
have been dealing with body reflection in a shallow way. All of a
sudden, the talks we have heard, the reflections we have done, all of
the many times we have chanted the "Thirty-Two Parts of the Body" or
some other body reflection, do not come into play. Where are they now?

The attachment to the body is so strong that we have to repeatedly bring
it into consciousness at a very deep level. We do this by accepting that
these bodies of ours are not things over which we have any control. We
reflect on the process of aging, sickness, and death, let it sink in and
at the same time, we look carefully at what is happening around us. For
a person who is going through the process of catastrophic illness, the
death process is not just something that's out there, but something that
is happening right inside that person's body. It could be the
proliferation of cancer cells reaching different parts of the body,
obstructing tissues, and airways and spreading to the bones and the
brain. I can recognize that all of that is something that could very
likely happen to me. Or, some other disease will happen in this very
body, to these internal organs, to all the parts we've been talking
about, visualizing, and reciting. Each part will come to an end. They
will all, at some point, cease to function, either one by one or at the
same time. These parts of the body are subject to dissolution, decay,
and decomposition and will return to the elements: earth, air, water,
and fire, nothing more than that. Yet it all seems so real, so personal,
and so "me," which is where the suffering comes in.

Bringing this reflection to heart is a significant part of daily
meditation practice, both on the cushion and off. To do this we need to
look around and bring this reflection into as deep a level of the
consciousness as possible. This can seem like a monumental practice but
it is possible. Over and over again we can gradually whittle away at the
identification we have with the physical form and eventually gain
insight into the impermanent and not-self nature of the body.

# Mindful of Right Effort

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 11-30-12

Both on and off the cushion, we can examine how the activity of daily
life is brought into the practice of Dhamma. In terms of the Noble
Eightfold Path, many path factors are concerned with activities off the
cushion. Developing *samādhi* with sitting is just one part of the path.
There is so much more that one needs to do to practice well and
correctly. If we think of practice as that which is only on the cushion,
then we are going to miss almost all the opportunities in our lives for
deepening the practice.

We should keep in mind throughout the day not only right mindfulness but
right effort. We do this by tapping into the awareness of wholesome or
unwholesome states presently occurring in the mind.

It is important to check in with our current mind states, periodically
investigating the mood of the mind so that appropriate attention is paid
to what is happening. We can ask ourselves if we are dwelling in an
unhelpful hindrance of aversion, craving, or some sense of impatience.
Do we try to rush and finish an activity so that we can be by ourselves
or do something that's more interesting than what we are involved in
right now? If there is a hindrance present, notice what that state of
mind feels like.

If they are unwholesome mind states or states that take us to a place
that is going to lead to more stress and suffering for us or other
people, then we can switch our attention and move into a state that will
have a more positive effect on the mind. We don't need to reinforce
negative states and allow them to drag us down.

Or conversely, is what we are experiencing wholesome or something that
is helpful to support in the mind? We might, for example, enjoy being
part of a work team and have positive experiences with other people. Or
we might work alone and enjoy a wholesome activity that's good for the
monastery. We can notice and reflect on these wholesome states of mind,
encouraging, supporting, developing, and maintaining them.

Our goal throughout the day then, both on and off the cushion, is to
check in every now and again as to the mood and quality of the mind.
From there, we adjust as needed to bring about the wholesome and
decrease the unwholesome.

# Where Did That Self Go?

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 12-06-13

This morning we chanted the recollection of the "Thirty Two Parts of the
Body," as well as the Anattalakkhaṇa Sutta, which mentions thoughts,
perceptions, and feelings. They can both be used to reflect on aspects
of not-self.

The "Thirty-Two Parts of the Body" is a reflection that can be utilized
to reduce sensual desire when there is a strong attachment to the human
body as an object of attraction. We can also bring this reflection up as
a way of dividing up what we usually consider a unit, a whole, something
to attach a sense of self to. Oftentimes we identify with this body as
either me or mine, as something I possess or something that is actually
who I am. The "Thirty-Two Parts of the Body" contemplation helps us
tease the body apart so that we can reflect on how this body is just a
collection of parts, any one of which we would be hard-pressed to say is
who I am or "me." We can ask ourselves, *What would happen if I lost an
arm or a leg or had a body part that had to be taken out because of
disease?* *If I take something away from this body then what is left is
different. So is this body any less me than it was before? Or is it a
different me? Or perhaps it is not me at all?* That is one way that we
can reflect on the "Thirty-Two Parts of the Body".

Our friend Iris's cancer has moved to her brain. Although she is having
treatment, her perceptual world seems to have been altered in some ways.
She perceives the world around her differently than she normally did or
how we normally do. When we look at things in a different way or see
different aspects or angles of physical and mental phenomena, it can
help us see how much stock we put into the continuity of the perceptual
realm. As the Anattalakkhaṇa Sutta suggests, we can see how we attach to
our perceptions a sense of me, myself, and who I am. This continuity of
thoughts, perceptions, and feelings weaves a web of self and sometimes
gets changed or altered or diminished, *Where did that "me" go to? Where
did that self go? Is it a different one? Is it the same one but looked
at from a different angle? Or is it possibly just another perception
that I have weaved together to give a sense of security and stability?*

It is good to reflect on the change and instability of what we normally
call me or mine, both in the body and in the mind. We can take this up
as a contemplation and examination, and ask ourselves, *Am I really any
of these?*

# Christmas Day: A Bodhisatta of Compassion

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 12-25-12

It's Christmas day. I don't know much about Christianity. Even though I
grew up as a Christian, I wasn't very attentive to the religion. As
Buddhists, we can sometimes have our own limited perspectives about
Christianity. We may find ourselves making different judgments about the
religion, or at least about how it's practiced in the world these days.
But one of the more positive memories that I have from growing up as a
Christian is Christ's essential message of compassion. Very similar to
the Buddhist motivation for compassion, Christ expressed his wish for
others to be free from suffering. We find compassion inherent within the
Four Noble Truths---we're looking at the truth of suffering, and how to
end it. One of the messages I remember from my early Christian
upbringing was that Christ was there to help others find an end to
suffering. As the teachings from Christianity suggest, Christ was so
tuned into the suffering of others and had so much compassion for
wanting to end it that he offered his life on the cross for all other
beings, saying that he would willingly die so that others could be
absolved of their sins. That's not something that we as Buddhists think
is possible---that we could take somebody else's kamma away from them.
But the notion of wanting to be able to do that, even if it's not
possible, is quite a powerful contemplation. The sense of wanting others
to be free of suffering so much that we are willing to die for
it---that's, at least, in the Buddhist paradigm, the sign of a real
Bodhisatta.

Whatever the reality is, having that kind of aspiration of wishing to be
free from suffering and wishing to help others do the same is a useful
message. As followers of the Buddha, we aim to figure out how we can
realize that. It means focusing our attention on the First Noble Truth
and recognizing the need to penetrate it. Before we can try to help
others become truly liberated from their suffering, we have to face it
within our own lives. We have to be willing to take a close look at this
dukkha---to experience and know what it really means before we can move
on to understanding its origin, letting it go, and developing the path.
This entails honest self-appraisal, and it starts right at home inside
ourselves. We begin to open up to this Noble Truth because we are
willing to look at our own unskillful habits and the unwholesome ways
that we've learned to operate in the world. For all of us, deep
conditioning in some way or another causes us to continue our old habits
of behavior which tend to bring on more difficulty and stress. This
includes the way we view experience or view other people and what we try
to get from the world or from our relationships with other people---the
whole gamut of what it is that we do in our attempts to gain happiness
and gratification. It takes bravery to go deep inside, look at the cause
of suffering in our lives, have compassion for that, and begin the
process of uprooting it. This requires honesty and integrity to truly
look at ourselves. As we do that, we naturally experience more
sensitivity, knowing that this same process is happening to everyone
else too. Because we are willing to examine ourselves and understand our
own suffering, this helps us to see that others are experiencing the
same difficulties as us. We can be more accepting of other's foibles and
bad habits because we realize that all of us make these same mistakes
when we try and take care of our own needs. If we have compassion for
ourselves, then we can have compassion for everybody else. To me that
seems like a way we can understand and emulate some of the teachings
that come from the Christian traditions.

# Self-Effacement

## Ajahn Karuṇadhammo

### 12-31-12

Developing insight around the aspect of *anattā*, not-self, is often
understood to arise from a sudden insight, awakening, or penetration
that results from the culmination of earnestly practicing *samatha* and
*vipassanā*, concentration and insight. In a sense there's a truth to
that. A deep and penetrating insight does come through investigation.
But there's a slow, gradual process that's part of coming to this
insight of not-self as well. The words that describes this slower
process best are "self-effacement"---a gradual thinning or wearing away
of the self making process, this sense of me and mine, and the ownership
and identity around all the things we usually identity with. The process
of self-effacement is a progressive and steady process, a whittling away
over time through various practices, not only the practice of meditation
and development of insight around the three characteristics, but in
everything we do as part of community training. Many of the things that
we incorporate into our daily lives and daily practices are ways of
increasing this kind of self-effacement, this gradual diminishing of the
sense of identity. It's a process that can take many, many years.

Dhamma practice and training, particularly in the monastic form, is a
long-term endeavor. There are many ways that our structures and
community life help support self-effacement. For example, the practice
of generosity is an external way of reducing the sense of
self-importance. We give of ourselves by offering our time and support
to each other and by making an effort in how we communicate with one
another. We are also generous with the work duties we take on and how we
contribute around the monastery. Little by little, if done sincerely,
it's all a part of the self-effacing process.

The hierarchy is another way that we can encourage this process. As much
as we try to establish an environment where people feel comfortable to
express themselves about the way things should happen there's also the
sense of hierarchy that we give ourselves to. We have business meetings
and regular circle meetings where people contribute in a free way. And
when decisions need to be made we utilize this hierarchy based on
seniority. Basically, it's boiled down to one very simple aspect of
who's been around the longest in robes. Hopefully, there's also a bit of
experience and maturity that comes along with years in the robes, so
it's not completely an arbitrary structure. Most importantly, it's also
a way of learning to let go of self views, self opinions, or the
thought, *My way is the right way*. If there's some sort of disagreement
or something that needs to be worked out or decided on with different
views and opinions, then seniority plays a part in that. We turn over a
bit of selfishness to the monastery hierarchy. As Ajahn Yatiko was
saying, if somebody misses a morning meeting, an evening meeting, work
or whatever other communal activity we have, then the proper protocol is
to mention one's absence to the senior monk as a way of being open and
honest. This is not encouraged as a punitive guilt trip, but as a way of
acknowledging our mistakes. All of these actions add up little by
little---working together, bumping up against each other, accommodating
each other, giving up our own views and opinions---all of these are
subtle ways of working toward self-effacement.

A number of us came to the monastery with a sense of wanting to become
something or somebody. It's sometimes nice to develop a set of skills or
a set of training that we can call our own, as a way of feeling like we
can contribute something unique. That's not a bad intention, but it can
sometimes be held to as an identity. For example, wanting to become the
best work monk, the best guest monk, the best attendant, the best
meditator, the best teacher, the most knowledgeable in suttas, or
whatever it is that we want to identify with. All of these skills can be
useful tools for community life, but we can also develop a sense of
identity around them---becoming this or becoming that---and doing what
we might be doing if we were engaged in worldly careers. The idea is to
pick up all of these things, use them, develop skills, but do this for
the purpose of maintaining community life, offering service, and really
looking at how to keep on giving up self identities and a sense of
self-importance in the same process. Little by little, bit by bit, with
this process we're realizing that there really isn't any "me" here who's
doing all of this. We are using skills to develop the Eightfold Path, to
encourage each other, and to contribute to Saṅgha harmony. Gradually
this process supports us in developing the insight into who we are not.
