**Ajahn** (Thai) From the
Pāḷi *ācariya*, literally “teacher”; often used in western monasteries
as a title of senior monks or nuns who have been ordained for ten years
or more.

**Anagārika** Literally: “homeless one.” An eight-precept postulant who
often lives with monks or nuns and, in addition to their own meditation
practice, also helps monks and nuns with certain services that are
forbidden for monastics to do, such as cutting plants or storing and
cooking food.

**anattā** not-self, ownerless, impersonal.

**anicca** impermanent, inconstant, unsteady. Ajahn Chah translated it
as: not sure.

**arahant** Literally: a ‘Worthy One’. A person whose mind is free of
defilement, who has abandoned all ten of the fetters that bind the mind
to the cycle of rebirth, whose heart is free of mental effluents or
outflows, and who is thus not destined for further rebirth. A title for
the Buddha and the highest level of his noble disciples.

**asubha** Unattractiveness, not-beautiful. The Buddha recommended
contemplation of this aspect of the body as an antidote to lust and
complacency.

**bhikkhu** A Buddhist monk; a man who has given up the householder’s
life to join the monastic Saṅgha. He follows the Dhamma-Vinaya—the
doctrine and the discipline—the teachings of the Buddha as well as the
Buddha's established code of conduct or heightened virtue.

**brahmavihāra** The four “sublime” or “divine” abodes that are attained
through the development of boundless loving-kindness, compassion,
appreciative joy, and equanimity.

**Buddha** The word Buddha literally means “awakened one” or
“enlightened one.” The historical religious leader and teacher whose
given name was Siddhārtha Gautama of the Sakyan clan. He is said to have
been born around 2500 BCE in Lumbini, modern day Nepal. After leaving
his family at the age of 29 and practicing various acetic practices for
seven years, he took a new direction in practice toward a middle path
between asceticism and sensual indulgence.  Shortly thereafter, at the
age of 35, the Buddha realized enlightenment.  He went on to establish a
monks', nuns', and lay order, giving teachings for the next 45 years.
The Buddha died at the age of 80.

**buddho** Used in the literal sense its meaning is “awake” or
“enlightened.” It is also used as a meditation mantra, internally
reciting *bud-* on the inhalation and *-dho* on the exhalation.

**Dhamma** Literally: the truth. The teachings of the Buddha explaining
the Four Noble Truths—how all beings create suffering for themselves and
how human beings can learn to be permanently released from this
suffering, ending the cycle of rebirth.

**dhamma** used as a term to define
natural phenomena of the world.

**Dhamma-Vinaya** The Doctrine and Discipline. The name the Buddha gave
to the religion he founded. The conjunction of the Dhamma with the
Vinaya forms the core of the Buddhist religion.

**dukkha** “Hard to bear,” unsatisfactoriness, suffering, stress; one of
the three characteristics of all conditioned phenomena.

**Eightfold Path** See noble Eightfold Path.

**Forest Tradition** The tradition of Buddhist monks and nuns who have
primarily dwelled in the forest emphasizing formal meditation practice
and following the monastic code of conduct (Vinaya) as laid down by the
Buddha.

**Four Noble Truths** The first and central teaching of the Buddha about
dukkha, its origin, cessation, and the path leading towards its
cessation. Complete understanding of the Four Noble Truths is equivalent
to the attainment of Nibbāna.

**hindrances** Impediments to progress in the practice of meditation.
They are: sensual desire, ill will, sloth and drowsiness, restlessness
and anxiety, and skeptical doubt.

**jhāna** Mental absorption. A state of strong concentration focused on
a single physical sensation or mental notion. Development of *jhāna*
arises from the temporary suspension of the hindrances.

**kamma** (Skt. karma) Volitional action by means of body, speech, or
mind, always leading to an effect (kamma-vipāka).

**karuṇā** Compassion. One of the four brahmavihāras or sublime abodes.

**kaṭhina** A traditional cloth offering ceremony held at the end of the
annual Rains Retreat celebrating community harmony.

**khanti** Patience or forbearance.

**khandas** (Skt. skandha) Heap; group;
aggregate. Physical and mental components of the personality and of
sensory experience in general. The five bases of clinging: form,
feeling, perception, mental formations, and consciousness.

**kuṭi** A small dwelling place for a Buddhist monastic; a hut.

**Luang Por** (Thai) Venerable Father, Respected Father; a friendly and
reverential term of address used for elderly monks.

**Māra** Evil and temptation personified as a deity ruling over the
highest heaven of the sensual sphere; personification of the
defilements, the totality of worldly existence, and death.

**mettā** Loving-kindness, goodwill, friendliness. One of the four
brahmavihāras or sublime abodes.

**Middle Way** The path the Buddha taught between the extremes of
asceticism and sensual pleasure.

**mindfulness** See sati.

**Nibbāna** (Skt. Nirvāna) Final liberation from all suffering, the goal
of Buddhist practice. The liberation of the mind from the mental
effluents, defilements, the round of rebirth, and from all that can be
described or defined. As this term also denotes the extinguishing of a
fire, it carries the connotations of stilling, cooling, and peace.

**Noble Eightfold Path** Eight factors of spiritual practice leading to
the cessation of suffering: right view, right intention, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right concentration.

**noble silence** Taking on the practice to only speak when is
necessary.

**Pāḷi Canon** The standardized collection of scriptures (suttas) in the
Theravada Buddhist tradition that have been recorded in the Pāḷi
language.

**paññā** Wisdom, discernment, insight, intelligence, common sense,
ingenuity. One of the ten perfections.

**papañca** mental proliferation, unskillful thought.

**pāramī** (Skt. pāramitā) Perfection of the character. A group of ten
qualities developed over many lifetimes by a bodhisatta: generosity,
virtue, renunciation, discernment, energy/persistence, patience or
forbearance, truthfulness, determination, good will, and equanimity.

**paritta** Auspicious blessing chants.

**pūjā** Chanting in various languages typically recited in the morning
and evening by monastic and lay followers of the Buddha. Typically the
recitations pay homage to the Buddha, Dhamma and Saṅgha.

**Rains Retreat** (Pāḷi: vassa) the
traditional time of year that monks and nuns would determine to stay in
one location for three months. Some monastics will take this time to
intensify their formal or allowable acetic practices.

**refuges and precepts** Traditionally the laity will ask to take the
“refuges and precepts” by repeating after a monk recites them. They take
refuge in the Triple Gem (Buddha, Dhamma, and Saṅgha) and make the
intention to follow the moral training precepts for lay people: not
killing, not stealing, not engaging in harmful sexual behavior, not
lying and not taking intoxicants. There are four additional renunciant
practices for laypeople which include not engaging in any sexual
behavior, not eating after midday until dawn the next day, refraining
from entertainment, beautification, and adornment, and not sleeping on a
high or luxurious bed.

**right effort** One of the eight path
factors of the Eightfold Path describing four methods in which a
practitioner endeavors to keep his or her mind free from defilement.
This is done by preventing the arising of unwholesome qualities that
have not yet arisen, abandoning unwholesome qualities that have arisen,
encouraging wholesome qualities that have not yet arisen, and
maintaining and developing wholesome qualities that have
arisen.

**right speech** One of the eight path factors of the Eightfold Path
describing the proper use of speech: refraining from lying, refraining
from divisive speech, refraining from abusive speech, and refraining
from idle chatter.

**sālā** Hall. Another word for mediation hall or Dhamma Hall.

**samādhi** Concentration, one-pointedness of mind, mental stability;
state of concentrated calm resulting from meditation practice.

**samaṇa** Contemplative. Literally, a person who abandons the
conventional obligations of social life in order to find a way of life
more 'in tune' (sama) with the ways of nature. Also, a wandering acetic.

**sammā** Right or correct.

**sampajañña** clear comprehension, self-awareness, self recollection,
alertness.

**saṃsāra** The cyclical wheel of existence, literally: ‘perpetual
wandering,’ the continuous process of being born, growing old, suffering
and dying again and again, the world of all conditioned phenomena,
mental and material.

**Saṅgha** On the conventional level, this term denotes the communities
of Buddhist monks and nuns; on the ideal (ariya) level it denotes those
followers of the Buddha, lay or ordained, who have attained at least
stream-entry, the first of the transcendent paths culminating in
Nibbāna.

**saṅkhāra** Formation, compound, formation – the forces and factors
that form things (physical or mental), the process of forming, and the
formed things that result. Saṅkhāra can refer to anything formed by
conditions, or, more specifically, thought-formations within the mind.

**sati** mindfulness, self-collectedness, recollection, bringing to
mind. In some contexts, the word sati when used alone refers to
clear-comprehension (sampajañña) as well.

**sīla** Virtue, morality.  The quality of ethical and moral purity that
prevents one from unskillful actions. Also, the training precepts that
restrain one from performing unskillful actions.

**five spiritual powers** (Pāḷi: pañca bala) A list of qualities the
Buddha gathered for the attainment of spiritual or supernormal powers.
They are: faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom.

**sutta** (Skt. sūtra) Literally, ‘thread’. A discourse or sermon by the
Buddha or his contemporary disciples. After the Buddha’s death the
suttas were passed down in the Pāḷi language according to a well
established oral tradition, and were finally committed to written form
in Sri Lanka just around the turn of the common era. The Pāḷi suttas are
widely regarded as the earliest record of the Buddha's teachings.

**taints** (Pāḷi: āsava) Mental effluent, fermentation or outflow. Four
qualities that taint the mind: sensuality, views, becoming, and
ignorance.

**Three characteristics:** suffering, impermanence, and not-self.

**Triple Gem** The ‘Threefold Refuge’–the Buddha, Dhamma, and Saṅgha

**tudong** (Thai) The practice of wandering in the country and living on
alms food.

**upāsikā day** A day for Abhayagiri lay devotees to visit the monastery
and partake in an afternoon teaching.

**Vinaya** The Buddhist monastic discipline, literally, ‘leading out’,
because maintenance of these rules ‘leads out’ of unskillful states of
mind. The Vinaya rules and traditions define every aspect of the
bhikkhus’ and bhikkhunīs’ way of life.

**vipassanā** Clear intuitive insight into physical and mental phenomena
as they arise and disappear, seeing them for what they actually are—in
and of themselves—in terms of the three characteristics and in terms of
suffering, its origin, its cessation, and the way leading to its
cessation.

**Visuddhimagga** A post-canonical collection compiled by the Bhikkhu
Bhadantācariya Buddhaghoṣa in the fifth century. It is a treatise
explaining in detail the path to enlightenment.

**Wan Phra** Observance Day or Monk's Day. Once a week in Thai
monasteries, monks and lay people set aside work and devote their time
for a day (and sometimes all night) to formal practice. If the practice
is continued until dawn the next day, the monks and laity will often
refrain from lying down until dawn.

**wat** (Thai) A monastery.

