# Glossary

**ajahn** (Thai): Literally, “teacher.” From the Pāli word ācariya;
often used in monasteries as a title for senior monks or nuns who have
been ordained for ten years or more.

**anagārika:** Literally, “homeless one.” An eight-precept male
postulant who often lives with bhikkhus and, in addition to his own
meditation practice, also helps with certain services that are forbidden
for bhikkhus to do, such as, using money, cutting plants, or cooking
food.

**anattā:** Not-self, ownerless, impersonal.

**anicca:** Impermanent, inconstant, unsteady. Ajahn Chah often
translated it as “not sure.”

**asubha:** Unattractive, not-beautiful. The Buddha recommended
contemplation of this aspect of the body as an antidote to desire, lust,
and complacency.

**bhikkhu:** A Buddhist monk; a man who has given up the householder’s
life to join the monastic Saṅgha. He follows the Dhamma-Vinaya (the
doctrine and discipline), the teachings of the Buddha as well as the
Buddha’s established code of conduct.

**brahmavihāra:** The four sublime or divine abodes that are attained
through the development of mettā, karuṇā, muditā, and upekkhā (boundless
loving-kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity).

**Buddha:** The historical religious leader and teacher who lived around
2500 BCE in the Ganges Valley of India. After his enlightenment, he
established a monks’, nuns’, and lay order under the instruction of what
he called the Dhamma-Vinaya—the doctrine and discipline. The word Buddha
literally means “awakened one” or “enlightened one.”

**defilements:** Impurities, vices. Unwholesome mental tendencies or
inclinations that cloud the mind. In their most basic forms they are
greed, hatred, and delusion.

**Dhamma** (Sanskrit: Dharma): In general, a spiritual or philosophical
teaching describing the natural state of reality. When used in this
book, Dhamma specifically refers to the teachings of the Buddha: a
systematic understanding of suffering, its cause, and how one applies
oneself to eliminate this suffering, thus ending the cycle of rebirth.

**dhamma:** Used as a term to define natural phenomena of the world,
including phenomena of the mind.

**dukkha:** “Hard to bear,” unsatisfactoriness, suffering, stress.

**Eightfold Path:** See Noble Eightfold Path.

**Forest Tradition:** The tradition of Buddhist monks and nuns who have
primarily dwelled in forests emphasizing formal meditation practice and
following the Buddha’s monastic code of conduct (Vinaya).

**Four Noble Truths:** The first and central teaching of the Buddha
about dukkha, its origin, cessation, and the path leading toward its
cessation. Complete understanding of the Four Noble Truths is equivalent
to the realization of Nibbāna.

**kamma** (Sanskrit: karma): Volitional action by means of body, speech,
or mind. Kamma always leads to an effect (kamma-vipāka).

**khandhas** (Sanskrit: skandha): Heap, group, aggregate. Physical and
mental components of the personality and of sensory experience in
general. The five bases of clinging: form, feeling, perception, mental
formations, and consciousness.

**kuṭi:** A small dwelling place for a Buddhist monastic; a hut.

**Luang Por** (Thai): Venerable Father, Respected Father; a friendly and
reverential term of address used for elderly monks.

**Māra:** Evil, craving, and death personified as a deity, but also used
as a representation of these elements within the mind.

**mettā:** Loving-kindness, goodwill, friendliness. One of the four
brahmavihāras or sublime abodes.

**Middle Way:** The path the Buddha taught between the extremes of
asceticism and sensual pleasure.

**mindfulness:** See sati.

**Nibbāna** (Sanskrit: Nirvāṇa): Final liberation from all suffering,
the goal of Buddhist practice. The liberation of the mind from the
mental effluents, defilements, the round of rebirth, and from all that
can be described or defined. As this term also denotes the extinguishing
of a fire, it carries the connotations of stilling, cooling, and peace.

**Noble Eightfold Path:** Eight factors of spiritual practice leading to
the cessation of suffering: right view, right intention, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right concentration.

**noble silence:** Taking on the practice to only speak when necessary.

**Pāli:** An ancient Indian language related to Sanskrit. The teachings
of the Theravada school of Buddhism were transmitted orally in Pāli for
hundreds of years before being written down at the beginning of the
Common Era in Sri Lanka.

**Pāli Canon:** The standardized collection of Theravada Buddhist suttas
written in the Pāli language.

**paññā:** Wisdom, discernment, insight, intelligence, common sense,
ingenuity. One of the ten perfections.

**pāramī** (Sanskrit: pāramitā): Perfection of the character. A group of
ten qualities developed over many lifetimes by a bodhisatta: generosity,
virtue, renunciation, discernment, energy/persistence, patience or
forbearance, truthfulness, determination, good will, and equanimity.

**paritta:** Literally, “protection.” Auspicious blessing and protective
chants typically recited by monastics and sometimes lay followers as
well.

**pūjā:** Literally, “offering.” Chanting in various languages typically
recited in the morning and evening by monastic and lay followers of a
particular teacher, in this case the Buddha. Typically these recitations
pay homage to the Buddha, Dhamma, and Saṅgha.

**Rains Retreat** (Vassa): The traditional time of year that monks and
nuns determine to stay in one location for three months. Some monastics
will take this time to intensify their formal or allowable acetic
practices. Monks and nuns will refer to themselves as having a certain
number of Rains Retreats which signifies how many years they have been
in robes.

**right action:** One factor of the Eightfold Path which prescribes that
one refrain from taking life, stealing, and sexual misconduct. In a
broader context it can be understood as refraining from unskillful
actions and encouraging skillful ones.

**right effort:** One factor of the Eightfold Path which describes how a
practitioner endeavors to prevent or abandon unwholesome qualities as
well as maintain and develop wholesome qualities within the mind.

**right speech:** One factor of the Eightfold Path describing the proper
use of speech: refraining from lying, divisive speech, abusive speech,
and idle chatter.

**samādhi:** Concentration, one-pointedness of mind, mental stability. A
state of concentrated calm resulting from meditation practice.

**Samaṇa:** Contemplative or wandering acetic. A samaṇa is literally a
person who abandons the conventional obligations of social life in order
to find a way of life more “in tune” (sama) with the ways of nature.

**sampajañña:** Clear comprehension, self-awareness, self-recollection,
alertness.

**saṃsāra:** Literally, “perpetual wandering.” The cyclical wheel of
existence. The continuous process of being born, growing old, suffering
and dying again and again, the world of all conditioned phenomena,
mental and material.

**Saṅgha:** This term is used to conventionally describe the community
of ordained monks and nuns practising the teachings of the Buddha.
However, from a noble or ideal view, it specifically describes the
followers of the Buddha, lay or ordained, who have realized one of the
four levels of awakening: stream-entry, once-returning, non-returning,
or Nibbāna. Saṅgha is occasionally used to describe the broader
community of Buddhist practitioners, lay or ordained.

**sati:** Mindfulness, self-collectedness, recollection, bringing to
mind.  In some contexts, the word sati when used alone refers to
clear-comprehension (sampajañña) as well.

**sīla:** Virtue, morality. The quality of ethical and moral purity that
prevents one from engaging in unskillful actions. Also, the training
precepts that restrain one from performing unskillful actions.

**five spiritual faculties** (pañca bala): A list of qualities the
Buddha gathered for the attainment of supernormal powers or faculties.
They are: faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom.

**sutta** (Sanskrit: sūtra): Literally, “thread.” A discourse or sermon
by the Buddha or his contemporary disciples. After the Buddha’s death
the suttas were passed down in the Pāli language according to a well
established oral tradition and finally committed to written form in Sri
Lanka just around the turn of the common era. The Pāli suttas are widely
regarded as one of the earliest records of the Buddha’s teachings.

**Triple Gem:** The Threefold Refuge: the Buddha, Dhamma, and Saṅgha.

**Upāsikā Day:** A day for Abhayagiri lay devotees to visit the
monastery and partake in an afternoon teaching.

**Vinaya:** The Buddhist monastic discipline or code of conduct. The
literal meaning of Vinaya is “leading out,” because maintenance of these
rules leads out of unskillful states of mind. The Vinaya rules and
traditions define every aspect of the bhikkhus’ and bhikkhunīs’ way of
life.

**wat** (Thai): A monastery.

