# Working to Let Go

## Ajahn Ñāṇiko

### 04-20-13

The work period is a good time for learning about how to let go. During
these periods the mind is constantly thinking,*I have to do this and I
have to do that and this needs to get done before I do that.* But when
the mind lets go of that it's malleable and, as the Buddha said, "fit
for work." If we only meditate and don't challenge the mind with
difficult and unpredictable situations, then the chances are the mind
won't learn how to let go. What really trains us how to let go are the
uncertain situations we are faced with. We might tell ourselves,
*O**kay, today no matter what I do, no matter what anybody says to me,
whether it's someone I don't like or someone I do, I'm going to let go
no matter what.* And then, sure enough, as soon as we make that
resolution, someone or something will come along and test us in a way we
didn't think we would be tested and we're unable to let go.

It's not only about letting go, it's also about choosing the appropriate
response. We are training ourselves to respond judiciously and to let go
within the bounds of a suitable response. By doing this we learn to
maintain internal and external harmony.

If we learn how to let go during or after activity, the mind will not be
stressed, and our default mental condition will be one of quietude. Then
the mind will also be quiet when it does not need to work. When the mind
needs to think or figure something out, it will do that and then go
quiet again.

We do not need to stress out over external things which may seem
important but in reality are insignificant. The external world is a mere
trifle compared to our internal development. The work period, or any
time we are doing something, is for seeking that internal development,
for seeking the Dhamma, and for letting go.

# Doing What's Difficult to Do

## Ajahn Ñāṇiko

### 07-25-12

Living in a monastery can be very difficult to do---eating one meal a
day, keeping precepts, trying to live and work together as a harmonious
community. But as Master Hua has said, if we want to practice Dhamma, we
have to do what's difficult, what others would not choose to do. Even
though most people wouldn't choose to live in this way, there's an
enormous benefit to what we're doing here. Living in community, we learn
how to hold things lightly and take responsibility for what's happening
in our minds.

During the work period, it's easy for one little event to trigger anger,
irritation, or some sort of desire. If this happens when we're
interacting with someone, the mind convinces us that it's the other
person's fault, as if these defilements came from that other person. So
it's good to remember that irritation, anger, and desires come from
within our own minds. They arise there and then seek external objects to
latch on to. That's why sometimes, no matter how easygoing we may be,
when we come in contact with some little thing or other we can become
irritated: the conditions for that irritation were already there. And
when we get stuck in irritation or anger with another community member,
we can forget that it's *dukkha.*We're suffering and the other person is
suffering too. Sometimes we can get angry at someone else because
they're angry. This is ridiculous, but it's the way it works. The Buddha
said, "If you don't react with anger to an angry person, then you win a
battle hard to win." So when interacting with others, we may need to
swallow our pride from time to time, as difficult as that may be.

I remember during my third *vassa* in Thailand, I was doing walking
meditation every day for several hours after the meal. There was a lot
of doubt coming up. I was literally driving myself to tears with
constant doubts in the mind. There I was on the walking meditation path,
no one else is around, and I'm mired in suffering because of this
unstoppable mental proliferation. That's how it is sometimes. But these
experiences are good to have---by going through them, we become
stronger. Even so, it's difficult to do.

Master Hua has said that we're aiming to develop a "long-enduring
mind"---a mind that can sustain itself through the months and years
without sinking far down, becoming dark, falling out of the robes, or
not wanting to be in a monastery anymore. To develop this long-enduring
mind, we need to come back to peace, to the skillful actions that help
sustain us, and to the factors of letting go. We need to come back again
and again, moment by moment. It may be difficult to do, but the reward
is true freedom.

# If It Doesn't Die, Make It Good

## Ajahn Ñāṇiko

### 11-05-13

It's important to reflect on the habits we have, to ask ourselves, *Does
this habit help to make the mind more peaceful, or does it tend to make
the mind more agitated?* The Thai *Kruba* Ajahns**often use the phrase
*plien nisai*, which means to change our habits. In the Thai Forest
Tradition there is a strong emphasis on changing one's unskillful
habits. Our chanting includes the *Ten Subjects for Frequent
Recollection by Monastics*, where we recite, "I will strive to abandon
my former habits. This should be reflected upon again and again by one
who has gone forth."

Habits run deep and they're very difficult to change. But if we have a
habit and notice that it's causing us to be agitated, or if we are
habitually irritated by something, we can use the Buddha's teachings any
time of the day to change our direction.

I remember Ajahn Jayasaro telling a group of us in Thailand, "If you are
keeping *sīla*, then no matter what lifestyle you are leading---even if
you are not meditating much---all day is an opportunity to be letting go
of defilement and training the mind." So whether we are working,
meditating, or whatever, there's always an opening for us to change our
obstructive habits. It takes mindfulness to see our habits, and it takes
effort and patience to change those habits, but it is possible---and
vital---to do.

As Ajahn Chah said: "If it isn't good, let it die. If it doesn't die,
make it good." Sometimes we have a habit we can't let go of. We try to
let it die, we don't feed it, but it's so strong that we can't let go.
In cases like that, we need to "make it good." We need to steer it in a
different direction. As we go about our day we can attend to our habits
and little by little steer these habits in the direction of the skillful
and wholesome.

# Skills for Letting Go

## Ajahn Ñāṇiko

### 12-19-13

In our practice we are normally working with the core defilements of
greed, anger, and delusion. Often when these defilements arise, the way
we deal with them is through restraint. When we restrain the defilements
it feels different than actually letting them go. With restraint, we
continue to experience the defilement, it's an undercurrent in the mind.
By contrast, when we genuinely let something go, there is a feeling of
being completely refreshed and replenished. There can be an experience
in both the body and the mind of being filled with a clear, cool, pure
substance. Restraint is important as well, however. When there is
irritation or anger in the mind, or a nagging desire that won't go away,
we can first use restraint as an antidote by applying, for example,
*mettā* or *asubha* practices. The mind will then loosen its grip on
these defilements and let go.

Sometimes we may think it's impossible for the mind to let go, but it is
important that we not think this way. The mind will let go in its own
time according to its conditioning and its *kamma*. In particular,
letting go depends on the kamma of our skillful effort in the practice.
We don't need to figure out when the mind will let go, we just keep
practicing. Walking, standing, sitting, or lying down, we keep the
Dhamma teachings in mind, moving forward with faith that true letting go
is possible. It is not helpful to tell ourselves, *I don't have enough
pāramī to let go*. Letting go is a skill. Everyone has to put forth
effort, especially when we are just beginning.

Learning how to fail is another important part of the letting-go
practice. About a month ago I was trying to fix an old planer. It was
difficult to get the blade removed. I was in the shop with Doug and I
told him, "I'm prepared to fail at this, but I'll give it a try." There
was one screw with a stripped head and after awhile I finally managed to
remove it. I was so excited when I took it out that I forgot to take out
the other screw that didn't have any problems. I started prying the
blade out and ended up breaking the planer entirely. Afterward I
reviewed my mind and I thought, *I told Doug that I was prepared to fail
at this, but actually I wasn't prepared to fail at all.* I spent the
next three days mired in *dukkha*, full of reproach about my foolish
mistake. It took quite a while to let that one go. So it's important to
learn how to fail without taking it personally. After all, taking things
personally is the very thing we're learning to let go of.

