# I Can Hardly Wait

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 04-12-13

I was at the Island Hermitage in Sri Lanka this past winter, where it
was very beautiful. While there, I did a fair amount of contemplation
around the topic of illness, which I found very useful to my practice.
The Buddha recommends it as one of the subjects for recollection: *I am
of the nature to sicken; I have not gone beyond sickness.* While walking
on my walking path I would bring it to mind: *This is going to happen to
me, there's no question about it, sickness is going to come upon me and,
most importantly, pain is going to come upon me.* This sort of
reflection isn't meant to be depressing or increase anxiety. It simply
functions as a means of facing an existential truth.

Here at Abhayagiri, we might be walking up and down on our walking path
on a beautiful day. It could be seventy-five degrees, the flowers are
out, and we feel strong and bright. Times like these are especially good
for reflecting that illness is coming, and that, at some point, we will
experience great pain. And rather than treating the matter in an
abstract way, it's best to be realistic, asking ourselves, *What does it
mean that this body is subject to pain? How am I going to prepare for
that? What does it mean that pain is going to come upon this body?*

This kind of reflection is valuable for several reasons. When we reflect
like this, it is possible for the superficial things that preoccupy the
mind to fade away into the background. It feels quite liberating to be
mindful that pain or death will be experienced. And that awareness
itself fosters a sense of readiness for the time when pain eventually
does come to the body. We can also use this practice when illness or
pain is actually present within us.

If we use our intelligence and think too much, it can lead to
intellectual endeavors that are not helpful. Truly, what we want to
cultivate is mindfulness, that awareness that can help us recognize
that, *This body is not who I am. This body is subject to many
experiences---feelings, pain of all sorts, and death*. If we are
mindful, this reflection can be uplifting---we recognize that we are
facing something that is the truth of the condition in which we are
living. It helps us feel much more familiar and intimate with these
realities and, therefore, less afraid of them.

When Luang Por Sumedho was once asked how he feels about death, he
grinned and responded, "I can hardly wait." I can relate to that. Once
we truly accept death we can simply see it as a fascinating
transformation, as a great change that will come upon us. That is all
that is happening, nothing more. We are moving into the space of a total
unknown, and it is going to be a radical transformation. That's exciting
and interesting, to say the least. Admittedly, death is uncertain, so we
don't want to slip into superstition or ungrounded confidence with
regard to it. We simply want to be willing to open ourselves to it, to
trust in the *kamma* we have made as human beings, and, especially, as
Buddhist practitioners. By trusting in that kamma, we can have the
courage to open up to the uncertainty of what will come. That is the
real adventure of the death process.

We are all involved in this project together. There is no project more
important than deeply coming to terms with and understanding our
condition as beings who are subject to birth, aging, illness and,
ultimately, death. Everything else is far down the list.

# When Generosity Motivates Our Practice

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 04-16-13

This morning in meditation I was reflecting on the various offerings
that have been made to me in my life. It's a really wonderful exercise
to do from time to time. This sitting cloth was made by Ajahn Ñaniko.
I'm wearing clothes that Dennis gave me. David's mother, Ayya Santusika,
gave the monastery this vibrating alarm clock. Ajahn Jotipālo made this
wooden holder for the bell. Ajahn Saññamo gave me the socks I'm wearing,
which were given to him by Tan Khemako, who received them from a
layperson. The flowers on the shrine came from our friend Apple.

As monastics, it's nice that, for almost any material item around us, we
can name the specific person or group of people who offered it. By doing
this we realize that absolutely everything we have is a gift from
faithful and generous people. As alms mendicants, we rely on the
faithful generosity of the laity to provide us with food as well as
other material supports---robe cloth, shelter, and medicine. Our
survival is sustained through the gifts of others. When we reflect on
this, quite naturally the result is a sense of gratitude and
appreciation.

At the same time, such generosity and support can cause us to ask, *Why
am I allowing myself to receive all this goodness and kindness?* The
reason is that, having faith in the Buddha's teachings, we became intent
upon being free from greed, hatred, and delusion; and so we came here to
devote ourselves to the Buddha's path, which takes a great deal of
commitment and effort. This is why we receive so much goodness from
others, which in turn inspires us to practice well.

However, this dynamic can create a problem. Many of us come from a
strongly guilt-driven culture, and we can say things to ourselves like,
*Everyone is supporting me, so I should practice hard, I should do
sitting meditation and walking meditation. I should learn the
suttas.*For us, the word *should* can mean that if we don't do it, we're
really bad monks. That's the completely wrong approach. Instead, we can
reflect that, *Since everything is given to me, even this body doesn't
belong to me. It belongs to the faithful---it's merely loaned to me by
them.* With that in mind, there's still the sense that we *should*
practice, but it comes from a completely different *should*. It's more
like a voluntary *should.* It comes from a wholesome desire to practice
because we know that it's worthwhile, a decent thing to do. We come to
realize, *It's for my own benefit, and it's for other people's benefit*.

As we walk on the meditation path, we can contemplate the difference
between these two kinds of *shoulds*. There's a significant difference
between the *should* of guilt, and the *should* of the natural and
wonderful activity we're interested in doing. We can reflect on the
blessings of our lives, the things that have come to us, and realize
what a wonderful opportunity we have to practice and cultivate the path
of the Buddha.

# Tuning Into Your Conscience

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 04-23-13

There's a certain danger in these everyday reflections. For those of us
who are community residents---who are here all the time and have
listened to these reflections every day for years---the danger is that
we might develop an attitude that has us thinking, *The senior monk is
just doing his thing, giving a reflection, and it doesn't really affect
me. I don't need to pay attention or internalize any of it.* *Here's my
chance to zone out and think about something else.*

If that is our experience then it's a real loss, because the purpose of
these reflections is to help create the conditions for all of us to
practice and positively influence the atmosphere of the monastery in
some way. Some reflections may include information or a practical
reminder, but the essential purpose, motivation, and intention is to
provide a form of communication and energy that's going to uplift,
encourage, and support the community.

As an encouragement today, I'd like each of us to tune into our own
situations. On some level we're the ones who know what needs to be said
and what we need to hear. So spend a couple of minutes in silence tuning
into your conscience and asking yourself, *What is it that I need to
hear? What is a good thing for me to hear? What kind of reflection is
really appropriate to my situation now?* The purpose is not to make us
comfortable and happy. Rather, it's to foster an understanding from
which we can say to ourselves, *Truly, this is what I need. This is
what's going to be good for me and my practice.* So spend a few minutes
imagining what that reflection might be. This requires sensitivity---a
tuning into the conscience. Please, take a few minutes for that.

# The Mood Is Not Who You Are

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 04-25-12

There's always a mood present in our experience. It's amazing to think
how the presence of a mood so completely shapes and conditions both our
attitude and the way we see things. It's important to have straight
vision---some sense of what our life is about, what it's for, and what
it is we aspire to. This vision or aspiration provides a compass when
moods arise that tear us apart and sometimes throw us into turmoil,
irritability, anger, depression, or frustration. Various moods and
emotions, often conditioned by relatively minor events, can arise and
push us in a direction that's quite different than the major direction
of our vision, our life, what we actually trust and what makes sense to
us.

One of the lay residents here at Abhayagiri once talked about an
interesting juxtaposition. One day, while feeling irritable, he came
down from the mountain and went into the kitchen. There was a guest
there who didn't seem to be pulling his weight, which affected this
resident's mood. Later on that day, he got word that this guest was
struggling to digest the news that his brother had been shot and killed.
Juxtaposing reality and perception---the guest's shock and the
resident's irritation, for instance---can put things into perspective
and reveal how petty we can be.

It's human to get irritated when things aren't going as smoothly as we'd
like or when we're feeling misunderstood. But we need to recognize that
indulging in such moods puts our present and future well-being at risk.
We have this life, and it's not a game. If we let our moods take control
and spur us to act on impulse, then we wind up doing things that can
damage our long-term interests and the well-being of others.

So when these unwelcome moods arise, it's important to do everything we
can to gain perspective on them and remember that they come and go. We
shouldn't blindly delight in good moods either. It's okay to enjoy a
good mood, but if we get lost in it then we'll get lost when a bad mood
comes around as well. There's no way around that. We can't realistically
say, *I'll take the good moods and forget the bad moods*. So we train
ourselves in meditation with any mood that comes up. We take stock of it
and remember that the mood is not who we are, as we chant in the
Anāttalakkhaṇa Sutta. When a mood arises, we do our best to recognize
its existence and then investigate how it may be pushing us to act in
ways that aren't helpful to our welfare, or the welfare of others.

# Breaking the Momentum

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 04-29-13

We can take these next few minutes as a time to establish mindfulness
and provide ourselves with a break. We can break the momentum of the
mind, which so easily gets caught up in becoming, especially when we
have ongoing projects and duties to attend to. It can be so easy for the
mind to obsess about unfinished tasks, keeping itself in a chaotic
world. If we find ourselves stuck thinking about a project
incessantly---trying to get it organized, straight, and complete---we
can take a few minutes like this to stop.

If we can't stop that momentum though, at least we can look to see if we
have the mindfulness to recognize this flow of thoughts. We can pay
careful attention to the mind that is creating time, a future, plans,
and everything else. We may find that to be a very valuable reflection
when this momentum of becoming is such that we can't seem to stop it. We
try to recognize and contemplate that this momentum and becoming is
happening right now, just like everything else in the universe. That
recognition alone is a very useful form of mindfulness.

When we're not able to step outside of our usual patterns of thinking,
and instead find ourselves caught up in the flow of becoming, or the
momentum of any kind of pattern---and we're identified with it---then it
is similar to a form of craziness. Luang Por Chah famously once said
that three seconds without mindfulness is like three seconds of madness.
So even though we are wearing robes, or are dedicated lay practitioners,
we can still share the exact same chaotic mental state as ninety-nine
percent of the rest of the planet. In those instances we are caught up
in the same momentum, identified with it, not questioning it, and
flowing on and on in the stream of becoming. So we need to use these
opportunities and formal structures like meetings, *pūjās*, Dhamma
talks, and reflections to break that pattern. For you laypeople, living
outside of a monastery, it is important to encourage yourselves to find
environments where you can create a break in that flow of momentum. This
can provide a space to establish mindfulness and allow you to reflect on
your life skillfully. Otherwise life ends up being determined by
patterns that have already been set in motion in the past---you're
simply riding a wave. It may be difficult to find such places for
yourselves, but it is important that you try.

These morning reflections are not just something to bear with and get
over so we can get on to our jobs; they're here for us to use, to take
up as subjects for contemplation. If we don't see very clearly how to
use them in a skillful way, then we need to take that on as a reflection
in and of itself. We can spend some time on the walking path or while we
are sitting and ask ourselves, *What is the morning reflection for?
What's the right attitude to have when it is given?* Based on what
arises out of this questioning, we can challenge ourselves further and
ask,*If this is the right attitude, is it something that I manage to
have and cultivate? Or have I allowed myself to get into the habit of
resisting formal structures?*

We are giving ourselves the space and time to pay attention to this flow
of becoming and to use these reflections and wholesome structures to
break the mind's unwholesome habits. By doing that we are slowing down
the momentum of being relentlessly caught in cycles of rebirth and
suffering. And when we have learned how to uproot this cycle, we come to
a natural place of peace and freedom.

# Reversing the Tendency to Decline

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 05-06-13

Last night a number of the monks had an opportunity to go up to Ajahn
Dtun's *kuṭī* for a discussion on Dhamma. One of the themes brought up
was the tendency for personal standards to decline in one's practice.
This is an important trend to examine. We can look at the direction our
practice has taken over time---how we started, how we've been
practicing, and where our practice seems to be headed. That's something
for us monastics to explore, because we can sometimes think of our
practice as merely the form of being in robes. But actually, it's the
heart that's practicing; the practice is not about taking on a role or
simply putting on a robe. So we should ask ourselves, *Where is this
leading, in the long run? What is the destination of the practice we're
doing now?*

There are two extremes for monastics that come to mind. One is moving
toward the sense world, which strikes me as a nihilistic place with an
emptiness to it. The other is moving toward some state of
being---becoming a certain type of person, identifying with a role or
believing that our goal is to become something different, improved,
efficient, or whatever. These are the two extremes. So we can reflect on
this and ask ourselves, *Is our practice moving in the direction of
cessation and peace? Or is it moving toward the world of the senses or
becoming?*

We can bring mindfulness and attention to this inquiry so as to see the
direction of our practice. Once we see this direction clearly, we can
reflect on what we need to adjust or correct. We do this so that our
practice is moving in a more direct, straight, and less wavering
direction towards a state of peace, understanding, and calm.

# Refocusing on the Defilements

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 05-12-12

One of the problems we come across is the tendency to forget the goal of
our practice and life---in other words, the direction where we should be
aiming. We need to frequently return to the basic intention to be free
from the defilements of greed, hatred, and delusion, because it's so
easy to get caught up in the conditions of daily life, wanting the
conditions to be a certain way, either liking our present conditions or
disliking them. People who are active, work a lot, coordinate a lot, or
do a lot of planning can easily spend the whole day manipulating
conditions, especially if they are skilled at this.

I once knew a German monk in Thailand who candidly said to me that he
could look at anything, for instance a water fountain, and tell me five
things that were wrong with it. He said he could look at anything and
tell me how to improve it, whether it's in the wrong place, designed
poorly, or not properly cared for. He said this in a sweet, non-boasting
way. It's easy for people with that ability to believe that they can
sort out all the conditions. Sometimes things truly *aren't* working
well or people *aren't* behaving the way they should, and in our minds
we think we can get it all sorted out. But when we try, it doesn't
usually work out the way we want. Or if it does, that can be even worse,
because then we're not likely to have been aware of the defilements that
came up when we attached to our view about the right way of doing
things.

It's as if we have a spotlight of awareness focused on external
conditions, applying strong views and judgments about the way things are
or should be. This can create a great amount of suffering in some cases.
Basically, we're looking in the wrong place. We can spend our whole
lives focusing outwards, trying to get things, situations, or people to
do what we want, forgetting that our awareness and perception should be
focused inwardly, on ourselves. In our tradition it's been said that, as
monastics, 95 percent of our focus should be on our own state of mind,
our own movements of mind. We focus internally because we want to be
free from suffering and this is how we accomplish this task.

Not long ago we drove up to the Old Gold Mine Hermitage, and in the van
I listened to a classic talk from Ajahn Jayasāro. It's called
*Recognizing the Upakilesas*. In this talk, he analyzes various
defilements of the mind such as anger, ill will, cruelty, envy,
belittling, and self-righteousness. As I listened, a mood of irritation
came up, and I started investigating what this irritation could be and
how I could describe its nature. To really describe a defilement we need
to study it. For myself, it's not so helpful to study defilements
intellectually, as in the Visuddhimagga, where each defilement is
defined as having specified attributes and proximate causes. Instead,
the way of study I find most helpful in practice is through direct
experience. So with irritation, for example, we study what's going on
right now, once irritation has arisen. We investigate what it's all
about, what it feels like, and what conditions gave rise to it in this
specific case. Doing this, we can clearly see that the conditions which
gave rise to irritation will change, and that irritation will arise
again in another situation if those same conditions are present.

We can use whatever arises as an object of study. Taking an extreme
hypothetical situation, let's say an anāgārika calls me "Ajahn Fatico,"
and I get upset about this, thinking what he said was inappropriate and
insulting. Let's say this gives rise to anger, and I really want to set
him straight. However, in terms of my own practice, the fact that he
insulted me is not the point at all because even if I do set him
straight and he apologizes, in the future I may feel hurt or angered by
a comment somebody else makes---I've done nothing to prevent that hurt
and anger from arising when the same conditions recur. It's an endless
cycle for us if we go about things in this way. So we need to change our
focus from being set on external conditions, such as what other people
say and do, and instead focus on the way our attachments, cravings, and
defilements move through experience. We can see that they aren't
ours---they don't belong to us. We need to recognize and appreciate
that.

The Pāli word *āgantuka* means newcomer or guest. An āgantuka monk is a
visiting monk who comes from a different tradition, who may have
different standards of Vinaya, or who does not know the way we do things
here. In one sutta passage, the Buddha says that the defilements are
visitors---that the mind is intrinsically pure, and the defilements come
into the mind as āgantuka (AN 1.49-52). So the defilements are merely
visitors, they don't really belong in the mind. We have to see how these
defilements arise and pass away, how they're not part of us and don't
define who we are. To see that takes attention, focus, and a clear sense
of our what priorities are in the practice.

# Respecting Others' Boundaries

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 05-16-12

I had a significant learning experience about two or three years after I
had ordained. A good friend of mine whom I ordained with was the
monastery's stores monk. One time he went away for a week to Pu Jom
Gorm, a branch monastery. During that time, I became the stores monk in
his absence. I was keen to be helpful and do something supportive or
generous as a show of kindness to him. So I cleaned up and reorganized
the stores room, and I thought I did quite a nice job. When this monk
returned a week later, he was visibly upset and took it as a personal
comment or statement that he wasn't doing a good job on his task as the
stores monk. This wasn't my intention at all. I saw some things that
would be good to do, so I went ahead and did them, though I was not
appreciated for what I had done.

In monastic life, it's important to recognize and respect other people's
boundaries. In this case, if I had been more sensitive, I would have
considered that my friend might feel that what I was doing impinged on
his role and duties as the stores monk; and if I felt something should
be done differently, it might have been better to have kept that to
myself. It can be difficult for the stores monk if all of us expresses
our opinions about the way he should manage his job. Or I might have
waited until he returned, approached him, and asked if there was
anything I could do to help. Then if he'd said something like, "Yes,
what did you have in mind?" it might have been a good time to express an
opinion while still respecting his boundaries.

To take another example, we hear the guest monk in the office giving
some advice to someone over the phone, and we feel *we* know what should
be said, and so we tell him what we think. This can be very burdensome
for the guest monk. We have to think about boundaries, because there are
many different tasks in the monastery: abbot, work monk, monastery
secretary, guest monk, stores monk, computer monk, kitchen manager,
chores monk, librarian, accounts manager, and so on. These tasks can
take a fair amount of effort and patience to deal with. So it may be
helpful for us---before we decide to "assist" someone or express our
opinion about how a task should be done---to ask ourselves whether we
are creating more of a burden for the person who has taken on the
responsibility of doing that particular task.

The subject of boundaries goes beyond respecting each other's duties.
There are also boundaries around physical space. How do we enter a room?
When we walk into a room with people inside, how do we enter their field
of awareness? Do we simply walk right in and announce our presence, or
do we respect and appreciate the space in the room, entering with care?

There are also property boundaries. Let's say I was missing something I
owned. I'm a senior monk and have an attendant. If I thought that what I
was looking for might be in my attendant's personal cupboard, I might
ask him to look in his cupboard when I next see him. But I would never
go through his stuff looking for something simply because I thought it
might be there. It's a different story if it's an emergency, but in
other contexts it's not something that I feel is the right thing to do.

Living in community as we do, we can think about boundaries and remember
that we want to focus on our own practice rather than what other people
are doing. As the Buddha explained, we shouldn't go outside our own
domain into the domain of others, because if we do, Māra will get a hold
of us (AN V. 6). We can think of this as understanding and respecting
people's boundaries. So we do what we can to respect and honor physical
boundaries, like property, as well as the boundaries delineated by
roles. In this way, we support harmony and well-being within the
community.

# Seeing Each Presently Arisen State

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 05-16-13

There's this lovely passage from the Bhaddekaratta Sutta (MN 131): "Let
not a person revive the past, or on the future build his hopes, for the
past has been left behind, and the future has not been reached. Instead
with insight let him see each presently arisen state; let him know that
and be sure of it, invincibly, unshakably."

Our lives are uncertain in so many different ways. All sorts of
curveballs could be thrown to us at any time, disrupting our flow. If we
understand this, knowing curveballs happen, we don't have to see them as
problems. Any anxiety we have around the future is not to be denied as
part of our experience. We can hold it, be with it, and try to act
responsibly toward it. At the same time, we can have mindfulness and see
anxiety as simply a phenomenon, a perception arising in the present
moment. If we closely examine whatever it is we're worried about,
thinking about or attached to, we see that very often it's nothing but
an idea in our heads, and from that idea we can create a whole world of
suffering. To penetrate and see this is an essential part of our
practice.

We do need to take care of practical things, such as our tasks during
the work period that starts a short while from now. But when we go out
to do some work it is crucial that we do not let those insights
slide---this reflection about the insubstantial nature of ideas and
concepts, the past and the future, and their potential for causing us
suffering. These insights are accessible and not that difficult to
penetrate, but it takes determination.

We have to go into the stream of the compulsive mind that's going in a
particular direction, very often the direction of *bhavataṇhā*.
Bhavataṇhā is the ongoing creation of and belief in a solid and
substantial self or identity that we are constantly propping up with
roles, habits, ideas, views, and opinions---*I'm like this, I'm not like
that*. We need to go against that bhavataṇhā, putting an anchor down in
the stream of becoming. Penetrating through the illusion of bhavataṇhā
is one of the most important aspects of our practice. It's more
important than any of the little hobbies we have, the habits we've
developed, the various ways we spend our time. We have to make sure that
in our monastic lives we don't let the hobbies become foundational. If
they do become foundational, then what *should* be
foundational---meditation---simply becomes a pastime. When that happens
it's tragic, and we need to do our utmost to cut it off.

And to cut it off requires being aware of it. In the sutta "Without
Blemishes," the Buddha points to the case where a person with a blemish
"understands as it actually is, 'I have a blemish in myself.'" He has a
blemish and *knows* he has a blemish, and therefore can be expected to
exert himself to abandon that blemish. But a person who doesn't realize
he has a blemish is not likely to do anything about it (MN 5). So this
is the starting point---being able to recognize a defilement as a
defilement, being able to call it that. That's step one. Step two is to
work with it.

# Joy: Rising Up and Going Forth

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 05-24-12

I was speaking with somebody recently who shared that he was finding it
difficult to settle into the joy of life, to sit back and enjoy being
alive. He thought that something was wrong with that. I explained to him
that, from a Buddhist perspective, it's not about settling into a joy
that's supposedly inherent in life; rather, joy is something that comes
from past action, from *kamma*. As my father used to say, "There's no
such thing as a free lunch." That's so true and a good reflection for
the practice. If we want to experience joy, it takes effort. How could
it be any other way? And while it may seem somewhat paradoxical, the
effort needed for joy to arise must be directed toward letting go.

Now I have fairly passive tendencies, and so for me, letting go requires
making an effort to counteract those tendencies. So letting go is not a
passive experience, but an experience of going forth, as if I have to
rise up and go forth into the present moment. It's a wonderful relief
when I do this---it's joyful. On the other hand, for people who tend to
be driven and goal-oriented, the process of letting go is very
different. For them, letting go comes with the realization that they
don't need to put forth a self-motivated, Herculean, obsessive effort.
It still takes effort, but for them the effort mostly goes toward
relaxing and calming the driven quality of their energy.

Once a sense of joy arises, it takes more effort to keep it going. We
get onto our walking paths, walk, put forth effort, and, when the mind
wanders and moves away from its center of awareness, we bring it back.
At some point joy may arise. It's wonderful when that happens, but how
long does that joy last? The image that comes to mind is one of those
carnival wheels that spins around for about 30 seconds, then slows down,
and finally stops. That's akin to the arising of joy and the way joy can
be sustained. We put in effort---spinning the wheel---and from that
effort joy arises. Then the wheel stops, and we exert our effort again.
Over time, with our continued effort, we can keep the wheel spinning
longer, and joy sustains itself longer.

When it comes to making our walking and sitting practice sustainable, we
do have to enjoy it. We can turn our attention to that joy. Right now
the weather is beautiful; the sun is out, and it's filtering through the
trees as we walk or sit in the forest. It's quiet, peaceful, and easy to
enjoy this opportunity to put forth effort toward something that's
absolutely blameless and wholesome. It's a remarkable opportunity. If we
can enjoy it, cultivate a sensitivity for the beauty, and develop the
wonderful experience of being free and unburdened, then that's going to
be a great help to our practice, our monastic lives, and our spiritual
journey.

# Listening to Reflections

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 05-27-13

I'd like to share an experience I've had, with the intention to say
something useful---to plant some seeds: Sometimes when monastery
residents or visitors attend these morning reflections, they can place
the teacher on a pedestal, as if he is about to say something that will
magically bring them insight; but, after listening for a minute or so,
they make up their minds that nothing worthwhile is being said and then
tune out. It's as if they feel it's the teacher's responsibility to
infuse them with something profound. But it's not. As listeners, it is
*our* responsibility to pay attention and extract meaning from whatever
is said. It's up to us. That's a change in attitude from simply
expecting the teacher to have all the information and deliver something
of value while we remain seated passively. With a different attitude we
could say to ourselves, *I'm the one with the power here. It's my life,
and I have to do what is going to be beneficial and meaningful for
myself.*

We should remember that. At the end of a reflections talk---whatever has
been said---we're the ones who have to take responsibility for its
impact. What are we going to do with what's been said? The teacher's
reflection can be something extremely simple. But if we are listening to
it with the right attitude and in the right way, it can trigger
something very valuable in our minds and hearts. Conversely, we might
hear a talk that is extremely profound, rich, deep, subtle, and
meaningful. However, if we are only sitting here because we always sit
here at this time of day or we do not make an effort to extract meaning
from what is said, then we are not going to get anything out of it. It
all comes down to the quality of attention we bring to the present
moment and how we listen to the Dhamma.

# Like a Snake Shedding Its Skin

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 05-31-13

Many of us often live in a fog of time. We can become caught up in this
fog---completely absorbed and obsessed with experiences that happened in
the past or we hope will happen in the future. It's as if this
perception of time has a reality to it that's independent of our own
machinations and creations of the mind. But it's not separate, it is
created and a part of our perception like everything else we experience.
Sometimes we get entrapped and absorbed in it through the different
physical and emotional difficulties we have, and we can't seem to rise
above it.

But sometimes we *can* rise above it. Sometimes we can experience a
clear perception of the present moment---the whole aspect of the mind
that creates time through projection, memory, and hope. It is a vivid,
here-and-now perception of what we're observing---like a portal, where
we slip through the delusion of the created world we live in and,
suddenly, we're in the present moment, which is grounded in reality and
has a sense of authentic truth.

A metaphor comes to mind of a snake shedding its skin. The Buddha uses
this image in the most profound sense, but I think it also applies to
the present moment, where the snake's skin stands for time: this scaly,
falsely-created outer skin of delusion that's part of our own making. We
move through it and leave it behind, which makes us naked and
vulnerable. It is not vulnerable in the sense of being fragile or easily
damaged. It is vulnerable in the sense of being able to receive the
reality of the present moment---including everything we create in our
minds---from a bare, new, and open field of awareness. It's freeing,
liberating, lucid, and it has the quality of truth to it.

When we're caught up and locked into difficulties and can't access that
truthfulness of the present moment, we have only one option: patience.
Sometimes we can't connect with the present moment because we're
captivated by our actions and the results we're receiving from our
actions. When that's the case, we have to be patient. There's nothing
else we can do. Just because we cannot connect with the present moment
doesn't mean we should give up on the Buddha's path and pack it in. We
need to be patient and keep with the practice, reestablishing our
wholesome intentions and our capacity for experiencing a present-moment
awareness.

# Putting Forth Effort

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 06-01-12

For both monastics and laypeople visiting the monastery, it is helpful
to reflect on sustenance, what it is that sustains us materially.
Laypeople offer food to the monastery, and we eat this food. They work
some eight hours a day, five days a week or more, at a job that can
often be unpleasant. It's hard work, and they call it work because it
*is* work. For most people the mind inclines toward not doing this work.
People would rather be relaxing, sitting out under the sun and taking it
easy, but they can't do that. They have to work, because they have to
support themselves and sustain their lives. Many people come to this
monastery on a regular basis with food they've bought using the fruits
of their own labor. We eat and depend on this offered food every day at
the monastery, so we have a very direct relationship with the work
laypeople do.

And as a result, we have a responsibility to practice; our practice is
why we are being offered food. Laypeople want to support the monastery
so that we will grow in the Dhamma and lessen our greed, hatred, and
delusion. Ajahn Dtun once said that we should be meditating at least
eight hours a day, because that's the amount of time laypeople put into
their workday---and for many of them it's even more than that. I think
that at Abhayagiri eight hours a day of formal practice would be
difficult, because we have a lot happening, especially in the mornings
with our work period and chores. However, we can still think of this
eight hours in the sense of making sure that mindfulness is present for
that amount of time---actually, for the entire day. During this time
we're not simply following our moods and opinions, we are going against
the grain and putting forth effort to decrease the defilements.

Some of us may feel dispirited when we hear about putting forth effort,
because it sounds heavy to us and we may not want to put forth a lot of
exertion. To be straightforward, whether we like it or not, it's
something we have to do; it's simply part of the deal, part of what
monastic life is all about. If putting forth effort is something we
don't want to do, then monastic life might not be for us. It is a life
of effort, and it requires resolution and struggle. We should keep that
in mind.

But the situation is not bleak. In the beginning stage of making an
effort, there is a hump we have to get over, but then it gets easier.
There are three phases of effort. In the first phase, energy needs to be
aroused, and this requires discipline and exertion. In the second phase,
once energy is aroused and established, the effort maintains itself to a
certain extent, because of that established energy. The third phase is
known as being unshakable, where nothing can stop the effort and energy
until the goal is achieved. The first phase is the most difficult,
because it takes a lot of strength and resolution simply to get things
going. It's like a rocket that's leaving the atmosphere; it takes an
enormous amount of fuel to overcome the pull of Earth's gravity, but
once it gets into space then it can coast for awhile. It's a bit the
same with the energy and effort we put into our practice.

Through this entire process, especially the first phase, it is extremely
helpful to hold the attitude and perception that making an effort is
actually *pleasant*. If effort is exercised properly, the experience of
effort is enjoyable, invigorating---something we can learn to delight
in. If we don't take delight in putting forth effort, then it is quite
an unpleasant experience. So we need to learn how to experience the
pleasant side of effort. We can start with a simple and direct
reflection: *In what way can I put forth and sustain effort so that it
is enjoyable, fulfilling, and nurturing to both my practice and to my
heart?*

# Happy to Stay at Home

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 06-04-13

One of the most important things for us to be doing here---as either
monastics or as visiting laypeople living like monastics---is to develop
our formal meditation practice. A key to this is learning how to delight
in meditation---the freedom that comes from simply sitting, not becoming
anything, resting in a state of mind that is able to put things down.

Yesterday I was reflecting on the word *concentration*, which is the
most common translation for *samādhi*. I think that's a poor translation
because *concentration* has a strong sense of coercing the mind, forcing
it to be a certain way. My understanding of samādhi is that it is a
freeing experience, rather than one which squeezes the mind into a
frozen or held state of being. It is much more an experience that allows
us to let go of unwholesome states of mind, especially those we are
obsessed with or attached to. What remains is a mind that is relaxed,
peaceful, and stable. It's not going out to search for happiness,
because it is quite happy to stay where it is, at home.

We often use the words *cultivating concentration*, which is an
important expression, but it can be misleading. Quite simply, it means
developing the ability to put things down. We can recognize that the
things which we attach ourselves to are endless, and that this
attachment results in *bhavataṇhā*, a sense of becoming---the incessant
inclination to exist, plan, create an identity, and attach to some idea
of ourselves as some thing. We're caught up in this becoming like an
animal in a trap. Either we see that it's going to lead to suffering or
we don't; but either way, if there's bhavataṇhā, suffering will be the
result. So one of the main tasks in our meditation practice is to learn
how to put down this becoming. Once we do, we will begin to experience a
profound sense of freedom. As Sāriputta once commented to Ānanda,
"Nibbana is the cessation of becoming."

So we need to use our time here to not only develop service and
generosity---which is so important to communal living and harmony---but
also to pay attention to our formal meditation practice---sitting and
walking---and the ability to put things down.

# Cultivating the Perception of the Present Moment

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 06-06-12

When we think about something repeatedly, it tends to become a fixed
perception for us, and we think about it even more. For example, if we
have a work project and think about it throughout the day, we build up
that perception and our tendency to think and proliferate around it---it
becomes a world unto itself, a perceptual world we inhabit. This
world-creating tendency builds momentum throughout the day, throughout
the week; when we get up to our *kuṭīs* in the afternoon and do sitting
and walking meditation, these worlds we've created manifest themselves,
and we think about them yet again.

But the corollary is also true. If we cultivate the perception of the
present moment, that too will develop momentum. This does not mean,
however, that cultivating this perception comes easily. When we get onto
the walking path, for instance, there may be a tendency to think about
computers, to think about a work project, or whatever. The untrained
mind naturally wants to wander or obsess and proliferate---to disconnect
from what is happening now. So we need to exercise discipline, saying to
ourselves, *No, now is the time to be in the present moment.*

Sometimes getting the mind back on track simply requires us to relax our
mental efforts. This can calm the mind so it's able to come back,
seemingly of its own accord. Other times we need to exert a conscious
effort to reconnect with the present. At first when we do that, we can
only sustain the connection for a little while before losing it again.
That's because it's a perception; left to its own devices, it comes and
goes, like all other perceptions. If we want to sustain this
present-moment perception, to develop a mastery around it, we have to
cultivate the perception repeatedly, over and over again. When some
little obstacle pushes us off in this direction or that direction, we do
our best to find our way---to find a direction in which we can drop all
obstacles and come back to the present.

Experiencing the present moment is always a relief and always
refreshing. If we're not experiencing it that way, it's probably not the
present moment! It's possible there's some residual attachment we're not
seeing or acknowledging. So while it is true that cultivating a
perception of the present moment is our duty, it is also true that
fulfilling this duty is a most gratifying and uplifting experience.
Remembering that point, we can undertake our duty with enthusiasm and a
light heart.

As monastics living here at Abhayagiri, we have the opportunity and
support to cultivate this present-moment perception. And such
cultivation is vital---it's an invaluable tool for developing the mind
and creating a foundation for deep insights into who we are, into the
nature of this mind and body. So let us use this day for cultivating our
perception of---and connection with---the present moment.

# Making the Embers Bright Red

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 06-06-13

Due to our past kamma, we have found ourselves in a Buddhist community
where there is harmony and good feelings, and, most importantly, we have
teachings that are encouraging us in the practice and leading us to
truth and peace. We have the space and time to practice and relatively
good health, and our requisites are well provided. We can recognize this
and appreciate the opportunity that we have. This is a helpful
reflection, but it is also important to have a clear insight into the
extreme rarity of this kind of situation.

When we develop this insight, it's like waving a fan in front of a fire
to make the embers bright red. We need to go over this insight and work
at it until we really see it. We can do this by setting a goal, not so
much to attain *samadhi* or to have perfect mindfulness, but, rather, to
arouse a clear, vivid sense of the urgency of our situation. If we are
successful, and this insight arises, it can be very exhilarating.

When the embers are bright red from this insight, then it's like
starting an engine; the engine takes care of itself once it gets going.
We start this engine by making an effort to see the specialness of our
situation, our environment, the teachings, and the comparative rareness
of this experience. We can ask ourselves,*How many beings are in a
situation where they are so tight up against the conditions of life that
they can't separate themselves from those conditions and it just seems
impossible to get a perspective on the Dhamma?*That's the case for the
vast majority of beings in the universe. Go over this insight into the
rareness of our opportunity, and work at it over and over again until
the embers are bright red and the engine is humming along without
effort. We can let the practice take care of itself from there.

# Mindfully Waiting in the Present Moment

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 06-10-13

Sitting here in silence, some might say, feels like a waste of time.
Sitting here waiting ... waiting for something to be said. It could be a
waste of time if we are sitting here waiting mindlessly. But it is not a
waste of time if there is mindfulness present and an awareness of the
present moment.

Usually, at this time of day, there is a sense of anticipation as the
work period draws near. There are thoughts about what we are going to do
and what we don't want to do, all of which are influenced by the
different attitudes that we have towards work. So this silence
beforehand can sometimes bring up feelings of anxiety, and we might
think, *Say something, it doesn't matter what it is, just say anything
to fill the space.* Or the mind can slip into an animal state during
which we zone out with eyes open, not really looking at anything. We are
here, but not present. Our behavior is almost cow-like.

During this silence many different feelings and thoughts can arise, and
we usually identify with them. We are like a fish caught with a hook and
line that is simply pulling us along. But if mindfulness is present, we
can see the hook and say to ourselves, *I don't trust that.* We have the
mindfulness to recognize the presence of experience, the presence of
feeling and thought, and we can think, *Wait a minute. This compulsion
to attach and identify with the content of my consciousness is just like
the bait on the end of that hook; it's trying to get me to bite, and
once I bite I can be caught up in it for days, months, or even a
lifetime.* With mindfulness, even if we get caught, there's no need to
despair. When we recognize that we're caught, it is much easier to
remove ourselves from that experience than it is to remove a fish from a
hook. A large part of the battle is already won because that recognition
brings us closer to the present moment.

The present moment is the place where we can recognize: there is the
content of experience; there is something in the content that we find
appealing---something that tempts us to make it our own; and there is a
desire compelling us to grab onto that content. When we're connected to
our present-moment experience in this way, there is the wisdom that
tells us, *I know this process of content-appeal-desire-compulsion is
not to be trusted. I am going to step back from that and let this more
spacious place of awareness and recognition establish itself. Then I can
proceed from that place, rather than from the place of compulsion.*

So whenever we experience these empty times of waiting for something to
happen, we can use them as opportunities to investigate and reflect on
the content of consciousness. This is hard work. It is the work of
spiritual life and one of the main activities we do with spiritual
practice. It is not like having a livelihood in which we are given a
clear task, day after day---a livelihood where we might have the
attitude that, A*s long as I do this I don't have to worry about
anything. I just do my job, go home, go to bed, and everything is okay.
I don't have to give it much thought.* This is not how it is with
spiritual life, nor with spiritual practice. We are not here merely to
have a place to stay and food to eat---that would be a terrible
motivation. The motivation to be here has to be for something noble,
something that involves the dignity of work and the dignity of silence.
And so whenever we sit in silence, whether in this room or someplace
else, it's not a time for mindless waiting. It's a time for work.

# Mindfulness With Moods and Defilements

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 06-12-13

Ajahn Chah once said that if we have three seconds without mindfulness,
it's like three seconds of madness. Without mindfulness we can get lost
in moods---happiness, despair, depression, elation, whatever.
Mindfulness is not about getting rid of our moods. It's about being able
to observe them clearly, to step back from them and recognize, *This is
simply what I'm experiencing*. It's being able to see moods as a flow,
like clouds moving through the sky.

During group meditation, it can appear as if nobody is experiencing a
mood except us; everyone else is sitting there with faces that seem to
look bored, while we're trying to be with some intense emotion. This is
an experience some of us have. Others of us don't have a lot of
emotional content or aren't really aware of it. Some people can be very
much in their heads and rational, absorbed in thought, analysis or
speculation. Others can be absorbed in some mood, positive or negative.
But mindfulness is that which is in the background containing all of
those experiences.

That's what we want to cultivate---that capacity to observe whatever it
is we're experiencing. To be able to watch our experiences, moods,
biases, rationalizations, and justifications is one of the most
important skills that we can develop as practitioners. This process is
connected with recognizing and accepting who we are. We're all doing our
best in a monastery. We don't have to be anything we're not.

On the other hand, we also need to question ourselves about how a
defilement manifests and to recognize when a defilement has arisen in
the mind. When a defilement *has* arisen, it's unhelpful to rationalize
or justify it. The defilements are not going to disappear on their own.
They are something we look at, recognize and see clearly. And we try to
understand how these defilements are leading to suffering. Attaching to
our desires, justifying, rationalizing, insisting on, and following our
defilements all lead to suffering. And mindfulness is that which leads
us out of suffering.

So whether we're investigating our moods or working with the
defilements, mindfulness is key. It's what replaces madness with sanity.

# Developing Good Habits From the Beginning

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 06-26-13

It is possible to have freedom from a mind that seems compulsively
locked into habits and mind movements. We have the ability to completely
put aside those habits and rest in a silent, quiet, spacious, aware,
calm, and devotional place. The path that leads to this place is the
path laid out by the Buddha---a transformative path that releases us
from the habits of mind that cause us suffering.

As far as habits go, it's much easier to develop good habits right from
the beginning rather than trying to correct our bad habits once they've
set in. When people first come to live at a monastery--- especially
junior monks, novices, *anagarikas,* or long-term lay residents---that
is the time for them to develop good habits. It's much easier to
accomplish in the early years, because the energy to do so is most
available and present. So that's the time to reflect on and establish
the practices recommended by the Buddha.

Whenever we perform an action there's a tendency for that action to be
repeated---that's an aspect of *kamma*. If we chose to act in a certain
way under certain conditions, then whenever those conditions recur,
we're likely to act in the same way. So when new monastics right away
get caught up into busyness, distraction, and work projects, then it's
likely they will continue getting caught up like that, over and over; it
will become their habit. Fortunately, this applies to our wholesome
actions as well.

It is a great refuge for us to recollect that we've exerted a
significant amount of effort in various aspects of the practice---study,
meditation, different devotional practices, service, and other wholesome
actions. This is a meaningful source of comfort, because we know that
what we've done in the past is repeatable---we have established an
ability to practice well. This can give us a sense of satisfaction,
which is especially important when we're going through a difficult and
challenging stretch. If I had never put forth that effort in my early
years, I think it would be very difficult for me to establish those
wholesome habits for the first time now, because I wouldn't know I was
capable of practicing in that way.

# Pūjā for Life

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 06-29-12

There's a passage in the suttas in which the Buddha talks about how long
people live. He says a person who lives a long life might live 100 years
or a bit more. It's interesting that people lived that long in the
Buddha's day. According to the suttas, there were many monks who lived
to be 80, and a few as old as 120.

Let's assume, for the sake of contemplation, that the longest lifespan
since the Buddha's time was 100 years. And let's say that my previous
lives were all human. If I lived to be 100 years in each life, it would
have been twenty-five lives ago that the Buddha was alive. I think it is
helpful to recollect this regularly and make the connection between our
own lives and the Buddha's life. We can connect with this remarkable
human being who walked the Earth and set rolling the unstoppable wheel
of Dhamma. By regularly making this connection to the Buddha, we are
consciously bringing to mind this remarkable human being who lived,
walked, breathed, and had sense experiences exactly like we do. Whatever
we're doing, we can connect it to the Buddha.

Suppose we were to forget about the past, as if the past didn't exist,
and imagine that today is the day of our birth, a fresh start. This can
inspire us to make a determination to live the rest of our lives as a
*pūjā*---as an expression of gratitude to the Buddha: *I want my life to
be as well lived, meaningful and beautiful as possible, as a way of
honoring the Buddha*.

This morning when we were chanting, I was looking at these beautiful
flowers offered to the Buddha and feeling a lot of gratitude arise for
the Buddha and what he's done. For many Westerners, the energy of
devotion is not easily accessible, but one way to get in touch with it
is through this sense of gratitude. If we reflect on what the Buddha
did---his awakening to this remarkable and uncompromising Dhamma, his
decades of teaching and exemplifying the Dhamma to innumerable
beings---we can get a sense of the incredible, meaningful life he led.
It can bring up a lot of gratitude, which comes very close to the
quality of devotion. Whether we're feeling gratitude or devotion, we can
connect it to a sense of doing pūjā for the rest of our lives---for this
one lifespan. We could give this life over to the Triple Gem and make
the whole practice a pūjā to the Buddha. This is a way of getting
outside of ourselves. Sometimes we get caught up with ourselves,
thinking, *Is my practice going well? I don't think my meditation is
very deep.* We can let all that go when we're connected to the quality
of pūjā.

We can take the next twenty, thirty or forty years---whatever we
possibly have left---and make our lives an offering to the Buddha. We
could do everything as an expression of our gratitude. It's not an empty
gesture where we think, *I haven't realized anything significant from my
practice so I might as well give it to the Buddha.* It's not like that
at all. It's a refined and beautiful practice in and of itself. We can
turn it into a whole meditation; we can use our whole day simply
reflecting on this. Suddenly, we might find ourselves happily cleaning
our shrine, no longer holding the attitude that, *I'll clean my shrine,
but only because it's monastery etiquette.* It's more like it is an
expression of our practice, because the highest pūjā we can offer is to
be mindful of the present moment and contemplate our experience. That's
really what pūjā is about. If we think in this way, pūjā becomes a very
valuable practice and is quite nourishing to our hearts.

# Truthfulness in Speech

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 06-30-13

One way we are generous with each other here at the monastery is in the
realm of truthful speech---an attribute that is essential in one who is
walking the Buddha's path. The notion of truthful speech is deep and
profound. It doesn't simply mean saying things that are truthful; It
also implies expressing ourselves honestly---being able to clearly
communicate with others, even when there's a thorny issue at hand.

Sometimes our attempts at communicating can be hopelessly indirect,
which is not helpful. For example, if we feel somebody is being unkind
to us, rather than letting them know we might instead ostentatiously
increase our "kindness" around them, hoping they'll get the message and
change. This rarely works and can sometimes be seen as passive
aggressive. So it's important to establish genuinely truthful speech to
directly express our needs to others, at the appropriate time, so they
can hear and understand us. This takes practice, but it's very much a
part of the path.

More generally, it is also important to act with a generous heart, no
matter what we're doing. This requires an attitude of taking
responsibility, recognizing that all institutions---families,
monasteries, and communities of all kinds---require people to take
responsibility, open their eyes, and see what needs to be done to help
others.

Sometimes when we see somebody in need, physically or emotionally, we
may think to ourselves, *Well, this is a big place and someone else will
take care of the situation*. When people think in this way, it is like
placing an invisible force field around others so that they can't see
them or their problems. Ajahn Amaro has colloquially referred to this
phenomenon as if people are approaching the world with an "SEP
field"---a somebody else's problem field. In a large community like
this, it can be easy to take the SEP field approach and ignore the
problems of visitors or those we live with. But we mustn't let these
people slip through the cracks or fall by the wayside. This requires a
resolve to help those in need as best we can, and not just for their
sake. Our holding to a such a resolve will help improve the overall
sense of well-being, functionality, coherence, harmony, and brightness
in the community we're living in.

# Krueng Yoo: The Tool That Sustains Us

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 07-02-12

It is worth reflecting on the Thai phrase *krueng yoo*. *Krueng*
literally means "tool." When it is combined with *yoo*, the loose
translation is "a tool used to sustain." With Dhamma in mind, krueng yoo
can mean a practice that is used to help sustain one's spiritual
existence. So we might reflect and ask ourselves, *In my daily life,
what do I use to occupy my time? What is the practice that sustains me?*

At times we may say to ourselves, *I've been scattered lately, and I
really want to focus more*. So we make a determination, *I'm going to be
more focused in what I do*. That can be a pitfall if our resolve comes
from the standpoint that our situation is not acceptable and from a
desire to control or coerce, rather than the standpoint of taking an
interest in examining our experience. It's like parents who constantly
tell their child what to do, trying to force the child to act in certain
ways; after a while, the child doesn't bother listening. The child and
parents can end up with a split. It can be the same with our minds---we
can have this split as well. We might try force ourselves to focus or
practice harder, but there's a part of the mind that can rebel, that
doesn't want to do be forced.

So rather than trying to force the mind, we can instead have an internal
dialogue. *Why is it that I don't want to practice sometimes? What is
that about?* Without forcing and imposing our control, we can get to the
root of the problem, through skillful investigation. Instead of
*telling*, we're *asking*---we're probing, inquiring, and looking for
the defilements that lurk within. Forcing ourselves to do something
doesn't actually deal with any of the defilements. We need to
investigate: What are the conditions that give rise to the defilements?
What causes them to hang around? This gives rise to an understanding of
ourselves, and an understanding of suffering. We might say that
investigating in this way is our krueng yoo.

# Looking Back on the Effort

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 07-06-12

Yesterday, Luang Por Sopah was giving some reflections about Wat Pa Pong
and what it was like in the early days. While Luang Por spoke, I looked
over at Ajahn Pasanno and saw him smiling brightly as he listened. I
could almost see the wheels in Ajahn Pasanno's head turning as his
memories were being churned up. It seemed to me that he might have been
thinking, "I know what Luang Por Sopah is talking about, and no one else
here can really know what it was like living with Luang Por Chah. But I
do know and I do remember."

I recall somebody saying once that after years of difficult practice
have passed and time has put some perspective on one's life, then one
can look back on all the effort and suffering involved in the practice
with real appreciation, delight, and gratitude. This is very different
from the suffering that arises when one becomes obsessed with personal
ambitions, worries, and concerns. When we look back on those sorts of
past experiences, there tends to be a feeling of loss and a sense of
time wasted.

But again, when we look back at the effort we have put into our
practice, how we have endured and cultivated the path, the beautiful
teachings that we loved, respected, imbibed, and listened to, then the
heart feels bright, warm, soft, and rich. That's something that I
thought I clearly saw in Ajahn Pasanno yesterday as Luang Por Sopah was
recollecting his life at Wat Pa Pong.

We can loose touch with the inspiring memories of our wholesome efforts
due to the immediacy of the daily difficulties, frustrations, and
temporary setbacks we experience. And with these daily concerns, we can
easily forget that we're engaged in something very beautiful and noble,
so that, from time to time, we need uplifting, we need to refresh
ourselves. That's where these inspiring memories of our past efforts
come in. They can uplift and refresh our practice, and so are worth
bringing up, reflecting upon, and appreciating. They remind us that we
have been engaged in something very beautiful and noble, indeed.

# Two Kinds of Fools

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 07-09-13

One of the things Ajahn Chah taught was what he called "earthworm
wisdom." For many people, earthworms aren't worth appreciating. But it's
earthworms that till the soil, and if they weren't continually working
away, the soil would be infertile and incapable of supporting growth.
That's a nice reflection, something to chew on.

The higher aspects of the teachings are certainly worth reflecting on,
and there is a lot of profundity to penetrate. But it's also true that
we live in a community and, very often, community living is where the
rubber hits the road. This is where we have contact, where we come
together and rub up against our rough edges. Everyone in the community
has the potential to make mistakes and cause offense or harm. When a
mistake happens it can trigger different responses, both from the one
who made the mistake, and from the one receiving the consequences of
that mistake. In particular, the Buddha says, there are two kinds of
fools in the world. One is a fool who, when having made a
mistake---either an offense or a hurtful action towards another
person---doesn't ask for forgiveness. The other kind of fool is one who,
when asked for forgiveness, refuses to give it. Do *we* sometimes act
like one of those fools? That's something else to reflect upon.

We live in this community and hope that it is a wise community. We want
to establish, maintain, and care for harmony here, because it is
valuable and also because it is vulnerable. Like all relationships,
those we have with our companions here require our generosity, and we
have to put our hearts into that. We do this by opening our eyes, taking
a look around, seeing how people are doing, and responding with our
hearts. We reach out to people who look like they may be struggling, not
doing so well, or who need a little bit of a lift. And in our hearts we
forgive those who've made mistakes, whether they've asked for
forgiveness or not. That's just ordinary kindness, but it's earthworm
kindness---it's what creates an environment in the community that is
very beautiful and uplifting. It provides the tilled soil from which
fertility, growth, and development of individuals can take place.

Solitude in our practice is important in helping us to relinquish the
unskillful views we've picked up in the past from misguided teachers,
friends, books, and other unhelpful sources---views that have influenced
us in ways not easily recognized. We need solitary practice to clearly
see those views and the effects of our prior conditioning---to discern
the Buddha-Dhamma for ourselves. But we have to be careful that our
solitary practice doesn't create a type of selfishness or self-centered
point of view. Living in community helps us remember to open our eyes
and see that there are people here who are going through the same
difficulties we are, and who may need the same sort of support we have
received. It is helpful to be conscious of that, expand our vision, and
care for the people around us. We are like earthworms tilling the
spiritual soil of the community so it is a fertile place for growth in
the Dhamma. When we come from a place of generosity and care, there can
be a strong feeling that we are living under very special circumstances.
This in turn uplifts our solitary practice and encourages a more
encompassing perspective.

# Asubha Kammaṭṭhāna: Perceiving the Unbeautiful

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 07-10-12

Yesterday Luang Por Pasanno spoke on the theme of *asubha
kammaṭṭhāna*---contemplating the unbeautiful. This topic can be
embarrassing for Westeners to talk about because it seems like such a
foreign and strange concept---deeply personal, almost taboo. Why do we
contemplate the unbeautiful? The answer isn't immediately obvious. But
if we look at this question in terms of our own experience, we begin to
see its benefit in our practice.

There is a strong tendency to judge and slap a perception on everything
we experience, and it could be said that whatever we experience is
filtered through these perceptions. In particular, we habitually
distinguish objects as either beautiful or unbeautiful. There is
something within us that creates this perception. But in fact, it's
merely a perception, not the ultimate truth of things; we can perceive
anything in the world as being beautiful or unbeautiful depending on the
way we've been conditioned to look at it. But when we look at the body,
we most always see it as beautiful and ignore its unbeautiful features.
That's our default bias. There is a deeply ingrained tendency towards
creating and perceiving the beautiful in the body, to become attached to
it, worry and fight about it, and become distressed when we lose it.

We all have *rāga-taṇhā---*sensual desire---as part of our being. If our
parents didn't have rāga-taṇhā, we wouldn't be here. When it's present,
we want to perceive the beautiful in the body. When it's not present,
the body doesn't seem so beautiful anymore---it doesn't appeal to us in
the same way. We're no longer in the grip of a desire that can lead to
painful mind states and regrettable behavior. This is where asubha
practice comes in: When we start thinking about what comprises the human
body---bones, sinews, blood, intestines, undigested food, the heart, the
whole lot of it---we may come to realize that these objects have an
unattractive quality to them.

But when left to our own devices, we tend to only focus on the thin
layer of skin that wraps around these unattractive objects, ignoring
everything else. Or we convince ourselves that the skin is of a
different nature than the rest of our body---but how could that be so?
How could the skin be of a different nature? The unbeautiful quality of
skin and of what it contains are exactlty the same, but because we've
created a fixed perception that the skin is beautiful, we see it in that
way.

The fact is, nothing in the world is inherently beautiful or ugly. These
are merely qualities we create and project onto the world. We can create
an entire universe of perceptions like those, which then dictate to us
what we want or don't want. It becomes a heavy experience---a heavy
reality---which is completely unnecessarily. Asuba practice can help
liberate us from this tyranny of entrenched perceptions.

Initially, there can be a strong resistance to asubha kammaṭṭhāna. This
resistance is rāga itself---the desire that does not want to give up the
perception of beauty. Recognizing and investigating this resistance can
be very interesting and a profound experience in its own right as well
as a direct way of working with fear. Even so, we might say to
ourselves, *I didn't take up the Buddha's teachings to focus on the
unbeautiful!* But actually, this is a significant part of the Buddha's
teachings, and it doesn't in any way overshadow the beauty of those
teachings. In fact, the feelings that arise from asubha practice are
themselves quite beautiful---feelings of letting go, release, and
freedom. It also helps, in overcoming our resistance, to recall that
asuba practice is to be done within the supporting framework of
loving-kindness towards ourselves and others.

However, we *do* need to apply this practice with discernment, to watch
out for any difficulties that arise. If we find ourselves getting
negative results from the practice, it's perfectly fine to put it aside,
for years if necessary. But at some point it's worth working with the
difficulties, because asubha kammaṭṭhāna is such a potentially rewarding
practice. Eventually, if we use this practice repeatedly, we will likely
discover that it's an extremely useful tool for the realization of
Dhamma.

# The Kamma of Listening

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 07-14-13

Offering a morning reflection like this is a bit like planting a seed.
What is said needs to be listened to with attention, care, and an open
mind. When that happens, the seed has been planted in good soil. If the
mind is not attentive or mindful, if it's off dreaming or thinking, then
it gets no benefit from the reflection. But if the mind is attentive,
focused, and keen to extract value, then even if what is said is very
mundane or something we have heard a thousand times before, the mind can
still benefit greatly. If we hear a reflection with the right attitude
and a desire for what is wholesome, then value can be acquired even if
we're not aware of it.

One of Ajahn Geoff's books is called *The Karma of Questions*. That's a
fascinating theme to reflect on: What kind of *kamma* is involved in
asking questions? It's not so much in getting an answer, but in asking
the question that we create our kamma. Similarly, we can reflect on the
kamma that is generated by listening to Dhamma. What does it mean to
listen to Dhamma? Why is listening to Dhamma such profoundly good kamma?
It's helpful to contemplate the value of listening to reflections and to
appreciate receiving reflections even though it may sometimes feel as if
we just want to get the experience over with as quickly as possible. If
we listen attentively to Dhamma, we can realize insight right at that
moment of listening, but also, days or even years later this Dhamma can
give rise to wholesome thoughts, perceptions, and attitudes, planted
like seeds in our minds. We never know when our listening to
Dhamma---that initial seed---will bear fruit, but the quality of our
listening will ensure the seed is in good soil.

# Taints to Be Abandoned by Using

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 07-17-12

In the *Sabbāsava Sutta---All the Taints---*(MN 2) the Buddha talks
about. He says we can abandon taints by using the four
requisites---robes, food, shelter, and medicine---in the appropriate
way. It's an interesting reflection that taints are to be abandoned by
consciously using the requisites. Even though we're renunciants and
sometimes we have ideals about getting by with less robe cloth, sleeping
outside, eating less, or some other idealistic standard, we always have
to remember that the foundation of our lives is based on a very down to
earth, grounded, and simple practice around robes, food, shelter, and
medicine. Attending to these requisites with mindfulness and care helps
us in our spiritual lives---that's the purpose.

A teacher once told me that when he eats, he does it as an act of
loving-kindness to his body. He feeds the body because he's caring for
it and expressing his desire to care for it. The body is quite fragile,
and it can be helpful to reflect on whether we are relating to the body
with loving-kindness or with a demanding attitude. Based on some ascetic
ideal, we might live in a way that is not kind to the body, causing harm
to ourselves. For the sake of our practice, we need to care for the body
in a mature and balanced way, with kindness and discernment

Food is a valuable tool that allows for comfortable, easy living. We
might identify with being really austere monks and regularly fast for
lengthy periods of time. Or we might move toward the opposite extreme
and take great delight in delicious food. In either case, we need to ask
ourselves, *Am I caring for the foundation of my practice? Am I using
the requisites wisely?*

Whether we are relating to the requisites from a sensual perspective or
an extremely austere perspective, this is not the path the Buddha
suggests. Rather, we can reflect on whether we are using the requisites
in a way that supports our long-term practice, and adjust our behavior
accordingly. That is a valuable reflection to cultivate, apply, and
strengthen over the years.

# Your Last Day Alive

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 07-21-12

During this morning's meditation, I was reflecting on the sutta,
Mindfulness of Death (AN 6:19) where one monk tells the Buddha he keeps
death in mind once a day thinking that he might live that much longer to
contemplate the Buddha's teachings. Another monk says he keeps death in
mind several times a day, and yet another monk brings death to mind
every minute or two. The Buddha says each one of these monks is dwelling
heedlessly. One of the monks present says he contemplates that he might
die in the time it takes for an in-breath or an out-breath. The Buddha
commends him for that. After all, we could die on an in-breath, before
breathing out. And with every out-breath, we could die before breathing
in again. This is a powerful reflection. It brings the mind into the
present moment in a striking way. Taken to a deep level, this reflection
can cause the hindrances to be in abeyance, because the hindrances
almost always involve the passage of time. If the mind is in the present
moment, and if we recognize that death could come this very
instant---with the snap of a finger---then there's no time for the
hindrances to arise.

For many of us, this is an old reflection. One way you can give it new
life is to assume that this is your last day alive and that your moment
of death will be tonight at the stroke of ten. How will you spend your
day if this is your last day alive? You might say to yourself, *If this
is my last day alive, I don't want to spend it on self-centered habits.
I don't want this last day of my life to be marred by being heedless or
by taking for granted this human form, this opportunity, this community,
or by concerns about my personal health.* Behaving in those ways on the
last day of your life would be tragic. You might also acknowledge the
ordinary and practical aspects of life, saying to yourself, *I still
have things I have to do today. I need to do chores and go to work. Let
me do this in a way that's going to be an offering so that I can give of
myself.* *I can support the monastery or help some people.*And finally,
you might say, *Today is my last opportunity to free the heart from the
defilements. Let me do my best.*

That's why we're here---to free the heart from greed, hatred, and
delusion. Sometimes we can get lost in judging our meditation---*My
samadhi is not good enough.* Although our meditation is very important,
we forget that the whole reason we're meditating is to free ourselves
from greed, hatred, and delusion. Depth of samadhi---and even profound
insights---are only significant because they support that freedom. So we
can reaffirm our intention to be free of greed, hatred, and delusion, to
be content with our experience. No matter how difficult our situation
is---our health, our position, or our mental states---it's not so bad.
It could be much worse. It's enough to be content with. This is simply
where we find ourselves in this moment. This is where our *kamma* has
put us. And it *is* possible for us to be content with our situation and
to use it to free ourselves from the defilements.

When we contemplate death and think we have to overcome the
defilements---which we do---remember that one of the defilements we have
to overcome is discontent with ourselves. It's so common in this culture
for people to find fault with themselves, to find it difficult to accept
themselves. This manifests itself in so many ways. Sometimes, we can see
this trait in people who are conceited. Often that conceit is a mask for
a lack of self-acceptance.

As this could be our last day alive, we can look at this
dissatisfaction, discontent, or lack of self-acceptance and let it go.
There's no time to waste. We don't have time to indulge in things like
that. To a certain extent we need to be strict and firm with
ourselves---*Things are okay. I'm okay. Everyone else here is okay. I am
good enough and they are good enough, and I don't have to make a problem
of who I am or who other people are.* We can let go of all our critical
tendencies; they simply don't matter.

What does matter is that we look into our own hearts to see whether we
find conceit there, a self-centered quality. Is there pride, ambition,
anger, judgment, or self-righteousness there? That's why we are
here---to look into our own hearts. We're not here to look at the
structures and forms, like the monastery or other people's actions. None
of this matters. The details don't matter. The monastery can be
beautifully efficient and well structured, or it can be chaotic,
strange, confusing, and disharmonious. All that, to a certain extent,
doesn't matter. What is paramount is looking into our own hearts and
asking ourselves, *Am I experiencing suffering or stress? What can I do
to understand it? What can I do to encourage wholesome states of mind
and decrease the unwholesome states?*

This is our work, and we don't have that much time to do this work,
because we never know how much time we have or when we're going to die.
So we need to take this reflection seriously, and to allow it into our
hearts.

# Letting Go of a Defilement

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 07-24-12

Ajahn Liem is known for working all day long and encouraging the
monastic community to contribute a great deal of work and service.
That's a big part of his teachings. But how well does it fit with our
practice here? When we are away from our *kutis*, many of us carry with
us the desire to return there right away and continue our formal
practice of sitting and walking meditation. Suppose a senior monk tells
us that the monastery just received a very large shipment of books, and
that we'll need to help out with that as soon as the meal ends until
eight o'clock at night. What would be our internal response?

As monastics, we're to set our intention toward staying aware of the
present moment and letting go of our attachments to the future and past.
That's what it means to be mindful and use wisdom in daily life. We open
to the present moment and abandon any notion of the future. In a
monastic environment like this, we're encouraged to let the future take
care of itself. We let go and do whatever is needed, whatever comes up.
Wherever there's an opportunity to serve or work, we do that. We simply
let go of the future. In a monastic environment, we can do that because
we trust that there will be plenty of time for formal practice when the
time is right.

When we are able let go of the past and future, we are letting go of our
fears, fixed views, attachments, and desires---we are letting go of our
defilements. This is a profound experience. We can study all we want
about Buddhism and have incredible knowledge of the scriptures in Pāḷi.
We can even write a book on mindfulness, but still not know what
mindfulness is or how to let go of a basic defilement. These are some of
the most important aspects of the path---to practice mindfulness and
understand how to let go of defilements. That's much more valuable than
knowing all the suttas.

So we use every moment throughout the day to practice letting go---when
we get back to our kutis and are doing walking and sitting meditation,
when we are eating, when we are working and doing service---whether
things are going well or not. We do this with a sense that the future
doesn't exist, by opening to the present moment and doing whatever comes
to hand. If nothing comes to hand, then we do walking or sitting
meditation, remaining in the present, moment by moment, letting go of
everything else. That's how we can build a strong and stable foundation
for the arising of insight and the development of the path.

# Determined to Suffer

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 07-31-12

We suffer because we are not seeing things with the right perspective.

We're here in this monastery by choice, and all the work is done on a
voluntary basis. It's a good place. Within this sort of environment,
there is no need to suffer. Things are the way they are. But through it
all, we still seem to have an insatiable need to suffer. We are
absolutely determined to not let go or soften our perspective. It's as
if we'd rather suffer than grow. The problem is, we don't realize that
suffering is going to grow and grow and grow. Eventually we are going to
have to let go of all the situations that cause suffering, such as loss,
physical pain, uncertainty, or whatever it is we don't like. It's just
the way it is.

The fact that we experience a particular object as something we don't
like is because of the way we structure our values and priorities
*within*. None of what we experience from the outside---be it community,
people, activities, or responsibilities---has an objective, factual
existence. It's something that we experience through our internal
senses. We give meaning to things, and, based on the meaning we give, we
attach to this and hate that. We create an entire world out of what we
experience, and we end up *living* in that world. The world, as we know
it, isn't actually out there; it's in our heads. Understanding this
helps us to see that our suffering is coming from our own actions,
views, and decisions, and not from the outside.

This sort of reflection is empowering, because it puts us in control.
There's really nothing and no one else we can blame. This truth is
especially apparent when we live in a monastery like this. It's good
enough to carry out our practice. Perhaps it's not so apparent for
people immersed in a cultural setting---local or global---where ethics
are not a priority, and introspection is not encouraged or valued. In
that situation, it's easier to convince ourselves that our choices and
actions are taking place in an external world.

But that perspective doesn't hold sway in the environment we have here.
So we can surrender to the situation, the routine, the principles, and
the practices of the monastery and learn to let go. Through that quality
of surrender, the heart starts to feel a sense of release. We start to
gain a sense of confidence as to what the spiritual life is really
about, and what's important in our life.

# The Triple Gem Is the Middle Way

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 08-01-13

It's interesting how things change when Luang Por Pasanno leaves.
Suddenly the energy in the community shifts. One of the roles a senior
monk takes on when he's the head of the community is to figuratively
place himself into the center of the community, and from that central
point, provide a focus for the community, be inspiring and encouraging
of others. His role is part of the external world we live in here. But
we each occupy an internal world as well, and each of us is at the
center of that world. And from that center, when push comes to shove,
we're each responsible for our own inspiration, encouragement, and
well-being.

So we have to find a way of centering ourselves that doesn't depend on
some person of authority or other external form of support---to find a
center that can serve as a point of focus and a stable refuge. If we
take our own desires and selfish cravings as a refuge, that's a recipe
for suffering. When we do that, we're headed toward an empty,
dead-ended, self-centered solitude that's very painful to experience. On
the other extreme, we could place the external world at our center,
seeking refuge in trying to serve and help, focusing all of our energies
on those in need. But one of the cold, hard facts of this world is that
there are many more beings in need than we could possibly help in a
meaningful way. So trying to center ourselves in unreserved, unremitting
service often leads to suffering as well, to frustration and burnout.

The middle way for all of this---for finding a center---is based on the
Triple Gem: The Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha. We can rely on the
Triple Gem for our center. We already know how much time we waste
focused on our own little thoughts, ideas, perceptions, aspirations,
hopes, and anxieties. We can get out of that mode by calling to mind the
Triple Gem---something extra-mundane and transcendent. We can let our
internal worlds revolve around and focus on that. When we focus on the
Triple Gem as our center, the focus is neither on ourselves nor on other
people; yet it is something that radiates everywhere, toward all beings,
including ourselves. And although maintaining this center requires
effort, we need not depend on external people or conditions to make it
happen.

# Using the Communal Life Skillfully

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 08-04-13

At one point while we were meditating together this morning, I became
vividly aware of the silence. Suddenly, it became extremely still, and I
had a very strong sense of collective practice, a sense of shared
activity with fellow practitioners. It was a very beautiful moment. I
think religious groups in general provide a sense of community or
family, because people in those communities spend so much time with each
other, in mutual care and support. That's very meaningful and valuable.

At the same time, living in community can mask the truth of our own
aloneness. When it comes time to die, we die alone. The people around us
when we die, with all their good wishes and best intentions, still
continue to live their own lives and deal with their daily tasks. I
imagine that in many cases this fact is not fully apparent to those who
are dying. They might be lying there wondering, *Doesn't anybody realize
this is happening to me, that I'm leaving soon?* They're not fully in
touch with the natural fact that life goes on, whether it includes them
or not. We are born alone; we die alone. Moreover, even while we are
alive and have many close relationships, it is inevitable that those
relationships will end eventually, one way or another. Perhaps a
long-term friend disrobes, or our teacher disrobes or dies, or a partner
or family member leaves us or dies. This experience is very painful for
many people, but we are subject to having that experience at any time.
That's a truth that living in community can mask.

Despite this truth, living in community can serve as a useful crutch.
Our existential situation can be compared to a person who breaks a leg;
while the leg is healing, there's a need for physical support, like a
pair of crutches. In this respect, religious institutions and
relationships are like crutches. This is not a value judgment, it's
simply a fact and a recognition that crutches are important for people
in need of support. In a community, we live in the presence of other
people. We have the responsibility to care for them. We provide them
with crutches, and they do the same for us when the need arises. And
when we help others, it lessens our self-centeredness and our unhealthy
sense of self-importance. That's good for us and good for others.
Everyone wins.

With the loss of friends, we can be reminded of our own existential
aloneness. At the same time, we can remember the support we receive in
community. We can remember that, when people leave us, the community
will encourage us to take our loss in the spirit of letting go, rather
than encouraging us to tightly grasp our crutches, hoping we'll never be
without them. Crutches are not supposed to be around forever. Their
purpose is to assist and lend strength until they are no longer needed.
So we care for ourselves, care for each other, and care for the
community in which we live, while recalling and respecting the fact of
our aloneness.

# Renunciation: Not a Simple Matter

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 08-08-12

Renunciation is a lovely reflection to bring up from time to time.
Sometimes people talk about how they've renounced something they were
strongly attached to. They say that, having renounced it, they're now
done with it, once and for all. However, it's rarely as simple as that.
Being attached to something means we don't want to let it go. Even so,
if we recognize that it is harmful, a desire may arise to let it go
after all, but we still have a difficult time doing so. Attachment and
renunciation are a pair, and their relationship can be complicated, so
it's good to reflect on them both equally. When we're attached to
something, simply making a decision to renounce it doesn't mean we're
done. It's a process.

Letting go from the heart takes passion, questing, searching,
determination, time, and cultivating the right *kamma*. Renunciation is
something that requires commitment, time, and patience. It takes every
opportunity we have to incline the mind toward letting things go. But we
can start with small steps, letting go of little problems and
complications. In doing so we find that, in time, we're making headway
on the bigger issues we struggle with; letting go of the smaller
problems and attachments eventually leads to letting go of the bigger
ones. So we learn to let go where we can, renounce where we can, and, as
a result, find peace where we can.

# A Foundation of Love and Acceptance

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 08-16-13

In this community at Abhayagiri, we need to take care of each other. If
we don't have a foundation of love and care for each other, then the
foundation of our lives is on very shaky ground.

I have a tremendous amount of respect and affection for each person
here, no matter what their personality traits may be. It is important, I
believe, that we give each other the space needed to be who we are. We
conform externally; we have these robes, shave our heads, and look
similar. Yet we are all completely different individuals, remarkably so.
We need to allow everybody to be who and what they are---to be
themselves. We mustn't start from a position of being unable to accept
something or someone. The starting point in practice is being able to
accept other people and to accept ourselves.

With that as a foundation, we then work with the defilements. It is not
as if we work with the defilements as a condition for accepting
ourselves---*Once my defilements are under control, then I'll accept
myself.* No. We start with acceptance, and from there we can work with
whatever difficulties arise. Likewise, there's no need to expect other
people to live up to our standards of monastery etiquette, harmony, or
even our standards for being happy. It is okay to have a miserable day,
to be gloomy for quite awhile. We are what we are, and we can accept
each other whether we are happy, sad, anxious, excited, or afraid. That
is a very good starting position on which we can build our practice.

# The Present Moment and the Illusion of Time

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 09-17-12

When undertaking the life of a monastic, we have a direction and a goal
in mind. There's something we're aiming for, and it's important to
reflect on that with some frequency. From time to time we can ask
ourselves, *What's the direction of my life? What's the goal of my
life?*

We can also reflect on where this goal is located. With understanding we
can see that it is located in the present moment. It's right now. Many
of us live our lives thinking about the future most of the time. As we
get older, we may think more and more about the past. But either way,
we're not in the present moment. This is particularly apparent in our
meditation, where the work is to bring our minds into the present and
cut through the delusions we create around notions of time. The entire
universe we attach to---what we like, dislike, dread, hate, fear,
love---is a creation of our minds. We've created it in the present
moment. Then we create this illusion of time and a whole universe of
*saṁsāra*, which we feel trapped in. But the whole creation of time is
something we do now, in the present moment.

Bringing the mind to the present moment is hard work, because, over the
years, we have pursued the habit of creating time, so that now this
habit has great momentum and it keeps pushing us into the past and
future. As a result, we could say, it takes a real 'balancing act' to
overcome that momentum---to bring ourselves back to a place that is
centered and balanced in the present moment. Doing this is a matter of
balance rather than effort.

When we see clearly, we clearly see that there's only the present
moment. That's all there has ever been. It takes commitment and
determination to see this and take it seriously. There is no worldly
benefit to be gained from returning to the present. No one knows if we
are in the present moment or not. No one will praise us for it, and we
won't get any money for it---we don't get anything worldly out of it at
all. But by continuing to return the mind to the present moment, we can
eliminate having to bear the weight of the whole saṁsāric universe on
our shoulders. No wonder coming back to the present is such a relief.

# Gestures of Respect

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 09-18-12

Yesterday I clearly saw a defilement in myself that I'd like to speak
about and share with you, so you can follow along with my process and
possibly make use of it yourselves.

In the morning, I was putting out seats for *pūjā* on the ordination
platform*.* For a long time I'd been resistant to the idea of putting
out a seat for Luang Por Pasanno when he's away, as he is now. There
seems to be an ambiguity about whether we put out a seat for him when
he's gone. Sometimes we do, sometimes we don't. There's no established
etiquette for this.

I had the thought, *He's not here, what's the point?* In the past,
whenever someone put a seat out for him, something in my heart would
roll its figurative eyes. But yesterday morning, as this reaction was
coming up, I recognized what an unpleasant mind state it was. I said to
myself, *Wait a minute. Putting out a seat is an act of respect for
Luang Por. Luang Por is our teacher, who has given us so much and helped
us in so many ways that we know and don't know. This act reminds us of
his presence in the monastery as the leader of the community.* So then,
when I did put out a seat for him, it came with a nice feeling of relief
to know that I could overcome this defilement of which I was previously
unaware.

It reminded me of Ajahn Sumedho's story about washing Ajahn Chah's feet.
When Ajahn Chah would come back from almsround, twenty monks would come
running out to wash his feet. Ajahn Sumedho would roll his eyes and
think how stupid it looked for twenty grown men to be washing one man's
feet. He thought this was ridiculous and said to himself, *I'm never
going to do that.* This happened day after day, until he eventually
realized that having this thought was causing him suffering. The next
day there were twenty-one monks washing Ajahn Chah's feet; Ajahn Sumedho
enjoyed doing it and felt really good about it.

By bringing this up, I'm not saying that putting out a seat should now
be established as monastery etiquette; I don't feel so strongly about
it, and if someone does not set out a seat, I think that's okay. Rather,
I'm trying to encourage us all to reflect on our attitudes about respect
and to question why we feel the way we do. We can simply ask ourselves
whether these attitudes are suffering or not suffering.

From that we might sense the relief that can come from choosing an
attitude that leads to a bright mind state instead of an unpleasant one.
Showing respect is a nice thing; it brings up a nice feeling. It doesn't
matter if people criticize us or think showing respect is stupid. If we
do something that feels right, that feels kind, then it is a good thing
to do. At the same time, it is not as if we are following a rule. It
comes from free choice, and that's what makes it beautiful. If this were
a rule and we put out a seat with a sense that this is what we were
supposed to do, that wouldn't feel very special. It needs to come from
the heart. And when it does come from the heart there is an attitude we
can have of wanting to use whatever opportunities are available to show
respect and be reminded of something good, something uplifting.

We can use that attitude in our practice no matter what situation we
find ourselves in. We can do something good, something kind, be
forgiving, patient, thoughtful, and helpful to each other. This is the
foundation of group harmony. We have a harmonious community of both
laypeople and monastics, and that harmony has its foundation in mutual
respect.

# The Gift of Space

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 09-22-12

It's a challenge to encourage people to grow in Dhamma. It's not a
matter of simply telling people what to do or asking people to conform
to a set of rules. We have to encourage and inspire people to dig deep
within themselves to respond to situations in ways that are skillful.
That often involves going against the grain. It's tempting to tell
people what to do and to lay down a rule, but that's not the point.

If we see anger arise in other people, one way to quell the anger is to
get really angry back and basically squash them with our words. That may
shut them up, but there isn't much---if any---Dhamma present in that
response. Another method is to manipulate them into to stopping their
anger by using subtle, temporary tactics, but that also doesn't help
them grow in Dhamma. What helps is meeting their negative energy with
space and loving acceptance. If we give them the space to reflect on
their own anger, they might realize that anger is a form of suffering.

Sometimes we give space but sense that no investigation has come from
it. If we give people space and they don't investigate their anger and
irritation, there's nothing we can do about that. There's no guarantee
that giving space to negative energy will resolve the situation, but it
does give the other person the chance to work with it. And if we *don't*
give space, if we respond to negativity with negativity, it's almost a
guarantee that nothing profound will take place. Giving space is one of
the best things we can do for people; it's noble. We don't condone what
they're doing at the moment, but by giving them space, we encourage them
to grow and gain insight into their own mental processes.

So this is a gift that we can give to others, a gift that others can
give to us, and a gift we can give to ourselves as well. Whenever we
receive this noble gift, we should use it as much as possible to
lovingly look into the mind and see what actions cause suffering for
ourselves and suffering for others.

# Having Faith in the Training

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 09-25-12

As monastics, it's worth keeping in mind where our focus is. It is not
on worldly skills such as well-honed public speaking. The Buddha said,
in former times, the monks who were respected and praised were those who
lived and trained in the forest and put effort into practice; but later,
respect and praise went to the monks who had good speaking skills.
Skills, talents, and even an ability to give good Dhamma talks are
praiseworthy, but what we are here for is the training. We are here to
train the heart, and training the heart doesn't necessarily result in
anything remarkable in terms of the external world. Training the heart
results in sincerity, openness, peace, and mindfulness. We should keep
in mind that this is why we're here. There's no other reason.

We need to have faith in the training---faith that the training works,
faith that it will bear fruit. We might come across obstacles which
could be with us for a long time, maybe for most of our lives. But the
training will bear fruit---it doesn't make sense that it would not.
We're putting sincere effort into cultivating mindfulness, restraint,
and understanding, and we're dedicating ourselves to the principles of
the holy life. The training has to bear fruit sooner or later, in this
life or future lives. If those principles don't hold true, then as far
as I'm concerned, life has no meaning. But because life does have
meaning---because those principles do hold true---the best thing for us
to do is give ourselves to the training, to the best of our capacities,
and bear with the difficulties that arise.

When an obstacle to our practice arises, we need to remember not to
throw the baby out with the bathwater. We do not have to disrobe or
leave Buddhist practice forever. Something may have to change, and that
might be a radical change in our views or in the way we approach
practice. To deal with obstacles, we need to think creatively, outside
the box, especially when we come up against a very persistent problem.
Most importantly, the way through an obstacle is not to give up the
struggle. Instead, we try to see it from a radically different
perspective and carry on with the training. It's the training that gives
meaning to life.

# Following Rules: What's the Point?

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 10-26-12

Yesterday in *Vinaya* class, we were talking about how we relate to
rules. As monastics, we have so many rules that are a part of our
lifestyle. There are countless rules that define the way we live and the
way we do things. It's interesting to see how Western monks like us
often relate to the rules in a fearful way. There's a sense of all these
different rules in place, and we're trying to control and force
ourselves to live within these different constraints. It can be
daunting.

We've heard from various teachers that following rules is not an end in
itself. Ajahn Sumedho speaks about Ajahn Chah as being a monk who was
very scrupulous with the Vinaya rules, but who didn't look or act like a
limited person. Certainly when I listen to Ajahn Chah's Dhamma
teachings, they have a vitality that's incredibly fresh and vibrant.
This seems related to how he followed the monastic discipline and rules
while not being attached to those rules. For ourselves, however, we need
to be careful and discerning in this particular area of non-attachment.

We often hear the phrase, "Don't get attached to rules." I remember when
I first came across Buddhism, I found teachers who weren't "attached to
rules" and sometimes ended up making a real mess out of their lives. It
seemed their disciples suffered in many ways as well, because of this
confused relationship with following a moral discipline. As a result of
witnessing that, whenever I hear the phrase, "Don't be attached to
rules," a red flag goes up for me, as well as a bit of fear. It's
important to recognize the potential for self-deception or self-delusion
when we take on this attitude and say to ourselves, *I'm not going to be
attached to the rules.* We want to be cautious about this kind of
attitude, because it can easily slip into following or not following
some moral guideline simply based on our likes or dislikes. We can then
throw out the rules we don't like anytime we feel they're getting in the
way of satisfying a particular craving we have or avoiding some
aversion. We go ahead and do as we please, regardless of the
consequences it may have for us or others, based on the excuse, *I'm not
attached to these rules.*

At the same time, it's important to remember that we're here to be free
from suffering. Although these guidelines help us, we're not here to
live by a bunch of rules that are going to force us into conforming,
keeping us nice and safe, or making us so bland that we don't have any
problems. That's not the Buddha's path to freedom. The Buddha's path is
to find contentment within limitations. We have limitations, forms, and
practices that serve as containers: the rules and standards of the
Vinaya. These aren't conventions that we have to feel limited or
constrained by. We can learn to relax around them, finding a sense of
inner contentment as we follow them and keep them in mind.

We can start by approaching the present moment with a mindset of
self-acceptance, freedom, and contentment---a paradigm with which we
don't have to be defined by rules or anything else. From that mindset,
we can see that all these rules we're living by are simply conventions.
They don't have any ultimate reality that has to define us. If we can
see that, contemplate that, and have a sense of expansiveness and
openness around these conventions, then perhaps we can experience
contentment within limitation. We can be free of the sense of constraint
while living within constraint. We don't have to be held down by these
rules and structures, because a feeling of real freedom is present
within us. And in that freedom, quite spontaneously, there can be a
sense for us that, *It's not a problem to keep to these rules*. And we
might think,*This is quite all right. I'm very happy eating one meal a
day. I don't mind wearing these robes like everyone else here, and being
celibate is beneficial for my practice and my mind.*

This mindset is quite different from feeling that we need to tightly
control our behavior and constantly look around to see if anyone has
spotted us making a mistake. When we have that sort of attitude, it can
feel like there's no room to breathe. We might be able to live like this
for a while, but I'm not convinced it's sustainable. It's a balancing
act, and it can be quite tricky. We need to learn how to reflect on all
this in a skillful way, recognizing the capacity for self-deception in
the area of non-attachment to rules. Then again, we need to recognize
that we haven't taken up the monastic life merely to perfect a litany of
codes and standards. It's not about standards. That's not the point.
It's about learning to find contentment within the context of
conventions.

There may be a danger that what I've said this morning will be
misunderstood. Do not think I'm suggesting that the rules should be
tossed out or not respected. I'm simply offering these reflections for
contemplation. How can we loosen our tight grip on the rules, while at
the same time continuing to follow them, understanding that they are an
essential part of the monastic path? Contemplating in this way takes
intelligence and ingenuity---plus circumspection, to ensure that our
reflections bring positive results---results that enrich and enliven our
practice.

# The Trump Card

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 10-29-12

During the recent Western Monastic Conference, I raised a question with
the Christian monks who were there, regarding an orthodox belief. I
asked, "What happens to an unbaptized baby who dies in childbirth or an
aborted fetus? Is it going to heaven or not?" One of the monks answered,
"Well, technically it's not going to heaven, because it wasn't
baptized." It's easy to think that's an outrageous belief. However, I
like the way Brother Gregory explained the monk's answer. "Look at it
this way: What trumps everything is that *God is just*. You can reduce
everything to this one concept. Everything else fits into this
understanding. If some issue doesn't fit, then either you're
misunderstanding the issue, or it's been improperly communicated over
time. *God is just*, so God is not going to send somebody to hell who
doesn't deserve it." Fair enough. Maybe the ways of God are mysterious
and beyond our understanding, and the bottom line is *God is just*. That
trumps everything.

Sometimes, over the many months and years of our Buddhist practice,
doubts can creep in. In monastic life we have this form---the bowing,
the routine, and the other structures we live within---and the doubt may
arise, *Did the Buddha really teach all the rules we find in the
Vinaya?* Or we may doubt whether certain parts of the early discourses
are legitimate. *Did the Buddha really teach those suttas in the Dīgha
Nikāya that seem so mythical?* How do we deal with that? In Buddhism we
don't have this concept of a permanent deity or a just God---we can't
rely on that. But there's another trump card we can play: *The Buddha
existed, and he was fully enlightened.* So I can reflect, *Perhaps
whatever doubts I have arise because the form has been distorted over
time, or because I'm not understanding how to see through the particular
issue at hand. But the bottom line is, The Buddha existed, and he was
fully enlightened.* That's a powerful perception, and it's important
that we do not let anything get in the way of that.

We can dwell on the things we don't like, the things we find
frustrating---those things that create doubt---and we can even come up
with persuasive reasons why something we doubt is, in fact, wrong. But
the effect of dwelling and thinking like this is that the heart can
become discontented. We needn't invite that sort of discontent when we
can just as easily dwell on our trump card. *The Buddha existed, and he
was fully enlightened.* When I bring up this perception, there's
immediate joy and love and a recognition that this form, with all its
imperfections, has a lineage that connects the Buddha with ourselves,
right now. Through hundreds of generations, we're connected in a direct
and tangible way to the living, breathing, walking Buddha---who existed
and was fully enlightened. We can easily forget that, because it may
seem so far removed from our ordinary, day-to-day experience. So we need
to make an effort to bring this trump card into consciousness.

This can be especially useful any time we're having issues with monastic
life or for lay people who might be struggling with doubt or with their
faith. It can also serve as a foundation for our meditation. If we feel
dejected because our *samadhi* meditation isn't working, or whatever, we
can return to this one idea: *The Buddha existed and was fully
enlightened*. It is easily accessible to us and uplifting. As we return
to this one idea, over and over again, we may well find that it trumps
all our doubts and difficulties.

# What Does it Mean to Listen?

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 11-01-12

What does it mean to listen? How many difficulties arise simply through
poor listening skills and not allowing others the space to say what they
want to say? It's not easy to find people who know how to simply listen.
A good listener doesn't focus on the content of what is being said.
Whether it's good or bad is not the point. The point is to simply
listen, to let people be what they are. This holds true for listening to
oneself, as well.

There's the mind state of listening and there's the mind state of
judging, and they are completely different experiences. There is an
open, spacious, attentive, and awake quality inherent in a mind that is
truly listening. Suppose everybody in this room right now had what we
might call a listening mind state, a state in which the mind is
sensitive and open. Given this shared quality, if everyone were to move
around in the room, coming in and out of everybody else's personal
space, there would probably be a sense of harmony. Compare that to a
room filled with twenty or thirty people holding tightly to some
judgment or view. It's likely that if they were all to move about the
room, it would be clank-and-clunk, everybody stumbling into each other's
space in some sort of disharmonious way. So listening, and its quality
of attentive spaciousness, is a beautiful skill to develop.

Truly listening allows things to be the way they are. It allows us to be
what we are. I'm not saying we should ignore those aspects of our lives
and practice that clearly need work and attending to. But I think most
of us are already pretty good at thinking of the hundred-and-one ways we
could be better. What we often neglect, however, is the wish to be
heard, which everyone has. Responding to that wish with compassion
requires that we develop the skill of receptive, non-judgmental
listening---listening to others and listening to ourselves.

# Small Choices Lead to Big Decisions

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 11-06-12

A lot of big decisions we make in life are dictated by the many small
decisions we make on a daily basis. That can be a very powerful
reflection, and one to keep in mind.

In the book *Crime and Punishment*by Dostoyevsky, the main character
offhandedly fantasizes about killing a certain woman and stealing her
money. He's not really serious about it, but he asks himself, "What if I
*were* serious?" He plays around with the idea, but realizes that he's
certainly not committed to the idea, and decides not to proceed any
further. But then, without even being aware of it, through a host of
minor decisions, he manages to put into place various minor conditions
that make the murder a real possibility. He goes from thinking the
murder ridiculous, to feeling like he has no choice in the matter---he
has to commit the act---and he does. It's like setting in motion an
avalanche: a little movement here, a little there, doing this, doing
that---then all of a sudden those seemingly minor conditions come
together and produce a catastrophic result.

So it behooves us to reflect on the little choices we make, the small,
moment-by-moment decisions triggered throughout the day by the various
situations we find ourselves in. This reflection is intended to
encourage us to be more circumspect about all those small choices. We
need to remember the causative potential of a choice we make in a moment
of heedlessness. It might seem like a small matter---and it might indeed
*be* a small matter---but when coupled with other small matters, the
cumulative effect can have a great impact. We can feel that external
circumstances have trapped us into making a big decision in which we
have no choice. But external circumstances aren't the culprits. We are.
It was all those little, heedless choices we made along the way.

# Toward a Reliable Refuge

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 12-04-12

This morning was one of those times for me when meditation went quite
well and was peaceful and bright. At the same time, I kept reminding
myself that there's no condition, even in meditation, that can be a
refuge. The same goes for life in general. It's good to contemplate that
fact during our meditation. While attending to our bodies, feelings, and
everything that's arising, we can say to ourselves, *Nope, this is not a
refuge*. When we do this, we find that our fear softens. There's nothing
to fear, because there is no condition that is a problem. Neither the
condition nor the fear is us. We don't get stuck on anything because
we've separated ourselves from the problem, relaxing and stepping back.

The mind can obsess about different subjects---for example, the
electrical system in the monastery. When we reflect that the electrical
system or thoughts about it are not a refuge, then the mind can let go
of obsessing about that and step back from it. The electrical system
doesn't really matter. We are going to be dead soon, and in the bigger
picture it doesn't matter how the electrical system is functioning.

This is the same with whatever mood we are experiencing. Moods are an
obstacle to our practice, because we're so tempted to believe in them. A
dark, despairing, frustrated mood, or a bright, blissful, joyful
mood---it doesn't matter which---consciousness can get stuck on the
perception or belief either way. More to the point, moods can't provide
a reliable refuge---they come and go like the wind.

We should contemplate our experiences and remind ourselves: when they're
good, that's not a refuge; when they're bad, that's not something to get
stuck on. What we find with this practice is that, since everything we
experience, feel, and imagine is moving and transient, none of that can
be a true refuge. The refuge lies elsewhere. So we go through this
process of deconstructing our experiences, stepping back from these
experiences, and that's the way we move toward a reliable refuge.

# The Breath Through the Fog

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 12-08-12

Ajahn Chah said that when watching the breath, it's important to
understand that our thinking doesn't have to stop. This is a very useful
point. Often while we're practicing to watch the breath, we get lost in
a train of thought and eventually remind ourselves to come back to the
breath. In many guided meditations, we hear the phrase fairly often,
"Come back to the breath." We can start to feel that thinking is a
problem, as if there is a battle between thinking and the breath. It can
become unpleasant, because we're fighting against our thinking. Rather
than battling like that, we might instead imagine that our thoughts are
like fog. We can be aware of the fog of thought, and when the breath
becomes more prominent we can observe the breath.

Another way to look at it is that the breath is always there, waiting to
be observed. We look through thoughts to the breath like we look through
a fog to see a light post or beacon. Rather than feeling we have to stop
the thinking, we try to see through it. It's okay for thinking to be
there if we have this attitude of trying to look through it. Observing
in this way, we're not compelled to give thoughts a lot of attention;
we're not interested in them. If we are able to observe our meditation
experience from this point of view, it's easy to remember that our
efforts in meditating aren't for the purpose of thinking, but rather
that they're aimed at connecting with the breath. By having this
attitude of looking through our thoughts, it can help us feel more
harmonious toward them. By contrast, when thoughts arise, if we respond
with, *Not again! I have to watch the breath*, then we have a sense of
failing. This defeats our aim of cultivating ease and contentment.

In daily life as well, we often perceive thoughts as a problem we have
to get rid of. And the same attitude can arise with the other
experiences in our lives. We have certain emotions, moods, and
interactions we want to get rid of because we perceive them as
unhelpful, irritating, and annoying. We get into a battle between what
we like and what we don't like. Instead, we can perceive experiences to
be like fog. When we see them this way, there's nothing we have to
suffer over. Ultimately, we will understand that there is no experience
or feeling we have to hold onto or be afraid of in this world, in this
life. If we have our hearts set on peace, truth, contentment, and
virtue, then, with that as a refuge, we don't have to fear anything.
When we commit ourselves to these principles and values, everything we
experience throughout the day is easier to let go of. We can see through
it all.

Everything becomes transparent in the light of this attitude, at least
it does when we can *access* that attitude. To do that, we have to put
it into words we can repeat to ourselves, so that we can come back to
this perception of seeing through the fog of thought and experience.
This can be as simple as telling ourselves, *What I am being distracted
by is just thought or some other experience, nothing more, and it is
okay for it to be here in my mind while I am following the breath.*This
is the way the mind can settle and become clearer and more peaceful. We
should try to see through everything in this way. When we do this with
thoughts, they tend to subside. Thinking becomes less problematic; the
breath becomes more evident. Clarity and peace arise.

# The Reason We're Here

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 12-11-12

What is the whole point of our being here? Where do we expect the
cessation of suffering to be? Is it some sort of project we're working
on? Is that where the cessation of suffering is going to be found? When
the fault-finding mind obsesses over other people's behavior, or when we
find fault with ourselves, is that where suffering ceases? Take a look
at where the mind goes and becomes contracted. Ask yourself, *Is this
where the cessation of suffering is going to be found?* Because that's
the reason we're here---to understand that.

So be really clear and try to bring that to mind. I often remind myself
of this. Whatever problem or issue it is that I'm obsessing over, I say
to myself, *I didn't become a monk to solve a bunch of mundane, external
problems.* What we need to focus on in our practice is much more
important than that. When we reflect on the real reason we're here, the
mind relaxes and steps back from the things it obsesses over. That's the
state of letting go. We learn to apply it to all the different
obsessions that come up in the mind, all the different activities and
projects we focus on and become obsessed with.

Of course, projects do have to be done, and we do have to plan for
things. But when we get caught up in all of it, that's what leads to
suffering. We've lost our balance; we've temporarily lost contact with
the whole purpose we're here. At the same time, it isn't helpful to get
down on ourselves for losing the plot---losing the plot happens to
everyone. But in order to snap out of it, we need to be reminded of our
purpose, which is to end suffering. We need to know that this is a
possibility, and we have to bring our mindfulness to that issue so that
we can loosen our grip around these different obsessions of the mind and
stop wasting precious time. By doing this over and over again, we can
learn to let go and realize there's no reason to suffer.

# Putting Aside What I Want to Do

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 12-16-12

In last night's Dhamma talk, Ajahn Karuṇādhammo said that one of the
most valuable things we can do as residents of the monastery is develop
generosity of heart by helping to create harmony in our community.
Instead of looking at things solely from the perspective of what we like
and what we want, we also consider the wants and needs of the group and
what is best for everyone in the community. It is good to think of the
Saṅgha as an organism of which we are a part.

There is a lovely passage that is often quoted from the suttas in which
the Buddha is talking to a group of three monks living
together---Venerables Anuruddha, Nandiya, and Kimbila (MN 31). When the
Buddha asks how they cultivate harmony, Ven. Anuruddha says, "Well,
Lord, I ask myself, *Why should I not put aside what I want to do and,
instead, do what these venerable ones want to do?* Then I put aside what
I want to do and do what they want to do."

It is true that while we are here we cultivate solitude. Solitude is an
important part of our practice, but equally important is the need to ask
ourselves, *What am I doing in solitude? Is it helping my practice or
not? Am I cultivating wholesome, bright mind states in solitude, or
might doing acts of service and helping the community be more beneficial
for my mind?* We don't have to be out there all the time doing things.
But whenever there is a possibility of helping the community or an
individual, that is an excellent opportunity, in the moment, to say to
ourselves, *Okay, here's my chance to do something, to break out of my
mold of solitude and contribute to the life of the monastery.* For
example, let's say I needed a volunteer to give me a hand with something
outside of the work period this afternoon, and I asked, "Is anyone
available for an hour?" In a situation like that, while we may have it
in mind to get back to our cabin and do some sitting, have a rest, read
some suttas, or whatever, instead we could spontaneously drop that
thought or desire and offer assistance. For this to be a special gift of
generosity, it takes a willingness to be spontaneous---this is how it
comes from the heart. To say to ourselves, in the moment, *Sure, I'd be
willing, I'll volunteer for that, I'd love to.* That's a beautiful way
to create harmony and appreciation, and it's a fine example of the
generosity that comes from the heart.

My intention is not to be one sided. I'm not saying that solitude is not
important and that as monastics and people living in the monastery, we
don't have the duty to cultivate a love for solitude. But we should also
remember that a love of generosity is an important part of the path.

I remember a time when a person who'd lived as a monk for ten or fifteen
years was clearly going through difficult times and was suffering from
serious mental problems. One of the senior Thai Ajahns was talking about
the reasons for this person's breakdown and said, "It's because he
hasn't developed enough generosity in his practice." You could see that
was true from this monk's behavior. He spent most of his time in
solitude, but didn't do it in a skillful way. He tended to run off to be
by himself at every opportunity. He rarely served or gave of himself. It
is not as if other monks didn't want him in the monastery or didn't want
to be around him. It was simply that they could not appreciate his
presence, because he was never really there for anyone.

A community is like an organism that requires care, attention, and
participation in order to function and remain beautiful, comfortable,
pleasant, and healthy. As members of the community, each of us has to do
our part in order to make that become a reality, because it does not
come about accidentally or on its own. In terms of cultivating the path,
I think this is worthy of reflection for our daily practice.

# A Positive Encounter With Death

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 12-19-12

There are many aspects of life that we bring to mind, consciously and
repetitively, as part of our training. One focus of our contemplation is
on the nature of mortality, the fact that we're all going to die.

I recently had quite a positive experience in this regard. Last night
there was a very strong and sharp pain in my chest that lasted several
hours. It was running down my arm and the side of my neck and seemed
very similar to a heart attack. But I was quite clear that it wasn't a
heart attack because the pain felt slightly off to the right rather than
to the left where the heart is. During this experience, I found that I
could easily pretend and convince myself for a moment that this was a
real heart attack.

Physically, it was very painful and difficult to breathe or walk, and I
had to sit down for several hours. Interestingly, the earlier part of
the day had been quite challenging, so that in comparison with that, it
actually felt good to suddenly be face-to-face with death. Everything
else fell away completely. All the concerns of the day, in a flash,
disappeared from my radar.

Two experiences came up quite naturally from this episode. One was a
recollection that my life as a monk has been pretty good. Certainly
there have been ups and downs, successes and failures, morally and
otherwise. But on the whole, I felt ready to die. I thought, *That's
okay*. The other experience was having mindfulness throughout the entire
episode. I felt that I had stepped outside the body and was observing
the situation from above, contemplating what was happening. I was able
to see that there was this human body and this process of attachment and
reflection. It was a bit surprising. I was looking at the whole
situation from this perspective of not-self, and was mindful of that as
well.

It was comforting for me to know that it was possible to have this
response to the perception of death. Everything that seemed so heavy and
weighed me down throughout the day suddenly disappeared like fog on a
sunny day. It just vanished.

# Problems From Nothing

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 12-24-12

If we were to look calmly and clearly at our experience living here in
the monastery, we would see that our lives are extraordinarily simple.
However, as human beings, we have this great penchant for creating
problems out of nothing, a tendency that is quite self-harming. We
create these problems with our perceptions and our desires. We pay
attention to them, dwell on them, think about them, obsess over
them---and so they stick with us. By dwelling on a particular issue, it
grows and becomes more entrenched in our being and more entrenched in
our perceptions. Before we know it, we're in a world that seems
tremendously complicated, and we don't recognize that this is something
we've created out of nothing. Behind these problems are nothing but our
conflicted and contradictory desires.

With the path laid out for us by the Buddha, we can aim to see this
process and explore how it is that we create these problems for
ourselves. This is what will alleviate suffering and stress and
ultimately prevent us from creating these complications in the first
place. There's nothing here in the monastery that is a real concern. We
have food to eat, water to drink---all our basic necessities are well
taken care of. There's nothing that has to be done. Furthermore, we live
in a harmonious community. Yet somehow we create a situation that seems
so complicated. We all create these issues, from the most junior to the
most senior of us. We can reflect on this and stop attending to things
that we think are our personal dilemmas. We can observe this
complicating and unnecessary process, put it down, and realize, *This is
ridiculous, I don't have to suffer about this at all.* When we gain
insight in this way, we come back to this peaceful, simple, spacious
lifestyle that we're offered as renunciants.

# Loving-Kindness for Ourselves

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 12-27-12

When we do *mettā* meditation---loving-kindness meditation---it's often
good to start with ourselves. But when doing that, it is important that
we not put ourselves under our thumbs---making demands about who we are
and what we should be. When this happens, it's as if we're looking at
the mind the way judgmental parents look at their child, power tripping
and demanding that the child behave in a particular way. *I'm going to
tell this kid what to do, and he's going to do what I say!* There can be
no joy in approaching the mind with the assumption that it will tow the
line if we force it to do so. Joy has to be unfettered, with a sense of
real freedom.

When we practice loving-kindness meditation, we turn our awareness and
consciousness toward our sense of being, our sense of existence, and we
give ourselves the space and freedom to be exactly as we are. There are
no demands placed on us---not on our physical bodies or on our
personalities. All of our expectations are irrelevant; they are a
fiction. We give ourselves freedom to be what we are, and from that
freedom we wish for ourselves, *May I be happy*.

For many of us, there can sometimes be a sense, or even an insight, that
our *modus* *operandi* is not to be happy. For myself, when I look at my
own behavior, it doesn't always feel like it's coming from a wish for
happiness. It can be like that for all of us, so we cultivate mettā as
an antidote. We turn our awareness towards mettā, and eventually we may
have a deeper insight: *Actually, I really do want to be happy, and my
heart genuinely wants that freedom.* The greatest freedom we can
experience is not the freedom of letting ourselves do what we want out
in the world. The Buddha says that freedom in its highest form is
freedom from affliction; it's not from the gratification of the senses.
It's simply the experience of sitting here with very little suffering
occurring for us; we're not making problems out of our experience.

When we have loving-kindness for ourselves, we want to imbibe the sense
that we are what we are and we don't need to make a problem out of any
of it. We want to tune into the sense that generating loving-kindness
for ourselves *is* what our hearts want---we want to be happy and free
from suffering. We genuinely want to care for ourselves. It's almost
insane how we don't act in our own best interests, how we forget that
this is actually what we need to be doing. So we need to make a
conscious effort to value our own well-being and to recognize the
heartfelt wish for our own happiness.

When doing loving-kindness meditation, we give ourselves space, freedom,
and acceptance. We express ourselves from a nonjudgmental attitude, *I
am what I am, and however I am, that's okay.* We bring up the wish,*May
I be happy*. Then we relax into that space and see what happens.

# Beyond Determinations

## Ajahn Yatiko

### 12-30-12

If we wish to overcome obstacles in the heart to experience the
transformation of the defilements, we need to recognize that it cannot
be done through force. This is an important principle in our training.
If we come across states of anger, irritation, or disappointment with
ourselves or other people, and we're getting stuck in these states and
dwelling on them, it doesn't work to simply make a determination to
force ourselves to change them. We may think, *Okay, I'm going to try
harder and make a new determination so I won't get stuck in these
states.* That's not going to solve the problem.

Even so, when done properly, making a determination can be extremely
valuable. And when a determination is valuable, if we slip up on it,
then it's helpful for us to recommit to the determination straight away.
But with deeply rooted internal states---such as irritation, ill will,
being judgmental, and other defilements that linger within---we can't
control our way out of them. We can't successfully determine, *I lost
it; therefore, I'm going to try harder and not let it happen again.*
Instead, it needs to come from a state of investigation and study. It
doesn't help us or other people if we criticize ourselves for slipping
up---and it also doesn't help to tell ourselves not to be critical.

We can't force ourselves to be happy. But there can be an investigation
and a realization that we don't have to suffer over something. It really
is possible to take a negative state, loosen it, and say to ourselves,
*I don't have to suffer over this–it's really not necessary for me to
suffer.* If that sort of loosening seems impossible, it merely means we
haven't found the right entry point into the state we're working with.
There *is* some entry point, some place where we're clinging and hanging
onto negativity. And there *is* a way to let go of it. We have to know
that, to have faith in that, and to trust in that. We can say to
ourselves, *This is not who I am, and there is some way to let go of
this. There's somewhere inside where I can loosen my grip. There has to
be. If there wasn't, that would be the end of this whole spiritual
path.*

So when these states arise, to a certain extent, determinations can be
helpful to deal with them. But in order to fully uproot these states, we
have to use introspection, investigation, and self-study, reminding
ourselves that we don't have to suffer over anything. If we can be clear
on that, then we can even work on states that seem impossible to deal
with, like physical agony---things that seem out of our control and
things that really *are* out of our control. We can find a way to loosen
our grip so we don't suffer. And that, of course, is the core of our
practice.
