# Mindfulness Develops Right Speech

## Ajahn Jotipālo

### 05-01-13

Ajahn Dton came to visit us once, right after one of our winter
retreats. During a question and answer period, I asked him if there were
any exercises we could do to improve the wholesomeness of our speech or
how to approach right speech as a practice. He saw right through me. He
could see I was hoping there was some sort of technique I could apply
before speaking that would solve all my problems around speech---a
technique that would tell me when my speech was appropriate and timely.
Ajahn Dton shook his head and said, "No, if you are looking for a method
or a technique, it's too late. What you really need to be developing is
all-around, all-encompassing mindfulness. For example, right now, where
are your sandals? If you were mindful when you took them off you would
know exactly where they are, what direction they are facing, and
possibly whose sandals are next to yours."

After we've taken off our jackets or set our car keys down, if we don't
know exactly where they are right now, we probably weren't mindful when
we set them down. We can take that as a practice, a training. With
everything we do we can try to make a mental note of it. That's one way
to bring ourselves fully into the present moment. To do that we need to
carefully slow down and be aware of the action we are doing. If we
practice being aware of where we place our personal items, then as a
benefit from that, we have trained ourselves to slow down and be aware
of our mind states. When speech then comes into play, the mind can be
more aware of what we are doing and we can start seeing what is
appropriate or not appropriate---if this is the right time to speak or
not. We may learn to question whether we need to say anything at all. By
training in this way, the ability to discern and make judgments about
speech can become much stronger because we have developed it with
mindfulness.

# Turning Inward With Patience

## Ajahn Jotipālo

### 07-03-13

I have been listening to a few of Bhikkhu Bodhi talks on loving-kindness
and was surprised when he mentioned that the word *khanti*, patience, is
very closely related to the word *mettā,* loving-kindness. I hadn't
recognized that before.

He explained that in practice situations, the use of mettā is more of an
external, outgoing energy, where we make a genuine wish for other people
to be happy. Traditionally, the first stage of mettā practice is focused
on wishing happiness for ourselves, which comes with a sense of
generating kindness and gentleness that goes inward rather than out. But
a good deal of the practice involves a desire for other beings to be
happy. In this way, it is about applying an externally-directed energy.

I have given a few talks on loving-kindness. When I do, I often receive
questions from people concerned with external circumstances, such as,
"It's so painful to be with this person," or "When I'm in this situation
it's really difficult. How do you deal with that?" Most of the questions
are directed towards the practice of loving-kindness as a method for
sending mettā outward. But we can also turn inward rather than outward.
This is where Bhikkhu Bodhi says patience comes in. We can learn to turn
toward the pain we feel---toward the *dukkha*we are experiencing in
these difficult circumstances---and to hold that dukkha with a quality
of patience.

Ajahn Sucitto once said that we often think of patience as waiting for
change. *I will endure this situation, gritting my teeth, until it
changes.* Certainly we might want a painful situation to change, but
with true patience, according to Ajahn Sucitto, it's more like thinking,
*I will be with this situation, period*. In other words, there's no
expectation that the situation will change or get better.

By learning to turn toward our suffering and simply be with it, we are
staying at the level of feeling. We are not getting into the story, the
proliferation, or creating a self around it. If someone says something
to us and we become angry or feel uncomfortable, instead of going
outward, as we typically do with mettā, we can go inward. So when we
feel pain in a situation, we can first recognize it. Then, we move
toward the painful feeling and explore it. If we can refrain from
getting into the story behind the feeling, it will be that much easier
to experience the feeling without wanting to change it. It's merely a
physical sensation or a mental perception and we do not need to add
anything to it or try to make it go away. When we stay with a painful
feeling in this way, we are experiencing khanti, true patience.

# Nipako: The Importance of Worldly Discretion

## Ajahn Jotipālo

### 07-12-13

One word mentioned in the Mettā Sutta is *nipako*. It is often
translated as "wise," "chief," or "highest." Bhikkhu Boddhi translates
it as "discretion" and talks about it in terms of worldly skills or
practical wisdom. One way to reflect on this translation of nipako is in
the realm of human relationships. By looking back on a conversation, for
instance, we can ask ourselves whether we had been gentle and
appropriate in that situation, and whether we had been deliberately
paying attention to the quality of our speech at that time. In this way
we can hone our communication skills and learn how to live more
harmoniously in community. When we get upset or are involved in a
misunderstanding or miscommunication, this word nipako points to how we
can use discretion and practical wisdom with this type of experience. We
can learn how to skillfully approach a person and work out a problem
even in a situation that is difficult or uncomfortable.

Nipako comes from the root word *nipa,* which means "to lay low." So I
think of it as not jumping into a conversation with the first thing that
comes to mind, and not trying to be the first person to come up with a
quick solution. Instead, it is more akin to paying attention and
watching.

We can also think of nipako in terms of learning and seeking guidance.
For example, it's important to take the time to learn how things work
instead of jumping in and trying to fix some particular thing when we
really don't know how. Otherwise, we might damage what ever it is, and
create a bigger problem in the long run. We need to learn to ask. This
applies to meditation as well. It's good to try new approaches and
explore different techniques on our own, but it's also good to ask and
seek advice from those with wisdom.

So with this quality of nipako we can apply our discretion and worldly
skills in all situations. We can learn to "lay low" with circumspection,
while learning from those who know what we don't. These are all
qualities highly commended by the Buddha.

# Don't Fill Up the Void

## Ajahn Jotipālo

### 07-23-12

Why did you come to Abhayagiri? What brought you here? Simply bring that
inquiry into your mind.

After traveling for the last month and being fairly busy, I returned to
Abhayagiri a few days ago. I've tended to go back to my *kuṭi*in the
afternoons and it's been really quiet. There have been no expectations
or demands on me. I've noticed in the past, after a period of busyness,
when I go back to my kuṭi for some quiet time, there is a feeling of
melancholy that comes up and a feeling that I should be doing something.
I've been looking at that for the last two days, going back to my
kuṭi and sitting there with that feeling. I'm not trying to label
it---anxiety, depression, or whatever else the mind wants to call it.
I'm just looking at it as a physical sensation and seeing how the mind
is reacting to it, how the mind is trying to figure out what it is and
why it's there. When I feel this way my tendency and desire is to say to
myself, *I should go do something to help the monastery or read a book
or do walking meditation*... There is this low-grade desire in me to
avoid feeling this melancholy. I don't *want* to feel it. Even something
as wholesome as reading or studying, if the intention behind that is to
avoid feeling something, then it's good to investigate that.

For at least a period of our afternoon, when we have solitude, I think
it is good to set aside some time to do nothing in particular. Don't
think of it as trying to meditate or trying to focus on the mind, but
just sit there and be willing to feel what you're feeling. See what
happens. See if it's aversion or pleasure. To me, this really gets back
to that first question, "What brought me here?" We are often trying to
fill up the void we feel with activities, planning, or whatever, merely
because we don't want to feel the discomfort of that void, or of any
other unwanted emotion. When we do this, we are not honoring the
wholesome intentions that brought us here. So instead, when we find
ourselves avoiding our experience, we can take the time to be quiet and
be willing to feel what we are feeling.

# This Pūjā May Be My Last

## Ajahn Jotipālo

### 09-02-13

There is a fairly well-known sutta where the Buddha indicates that one
who contemplates death about every few seconds develops mindfulness of
death heedfully, with diligence; while one who contemplates death every
few minutes or more develops mindfulness of death heedlessly, with
sluggishness (AN 8:73). It only takes two or three seconds for someone
to die from an aneurysm. It's much the same with a massive heart attack
or any number of other medical conditions and accidental calamities. We
can be fully functional one moment, and dead two or three seconds later.
So we have good reason to contemplate death quite often, as the Buddha
suggested.

Sitting on the Ordination Platform this morning for pūjā, I had an
unusually strong sense of how beautiful it was, just sitting there. I
asked myself why I might be feeling this way. We are getting ready to go
on a trip to Yosemite and there is a national disaster occurring just 20
miles from where we will be camping. When I looked online yesterday to
check out the conditions, there were three major weather alerts for
Yosemite valley. One was a warning about severe thunderstorms, another
was a flash flood warning, and the third warned about unhealthy levels
of smoke in the air due to the large fires burning in the area. And of
course, there was the risk of fire itself. I said to myself
sarcastically, Oh, this looks like a wonderful place to go camping!
Luang Por Pasanno is urging me to go and says it's a great opportunity.
I keep thinking, Does he just want to send me off to my death? Sitting
there during pūjā, I had the sense that it really could be my last pūjā
on that platform.

This is true for every single one of us. Maybe you're not heading off to
Yosemite, but death could occur at any time---when you're driving into
Ukiah, or taking the small diesel vehicle up the monastery road, or
perhaps working in the kitchen where the gas oven might explode. We
don't need to be obsessive or neurotic about death, but it is good to
have it constantly in the back of our minds.

Just before coming to Abhayagiri, I used to be on the maintenance staff
at the Insight Meditation Society, IMS, in Barre, Massachusetts. I
remember being strongly attached to certain opinions about the way
things should be done with work projects there, such as using particular
types of paint and cleaning products. These sorts of opinions were a
major part of my consciousness in whatever project I was involved. But
after leaving IMS and coming here, I realized that I didn't have a care
in the world about what kind of paint they were using in Barre. My
consciousness of being at IMS had, in essence, died---not in a negative
way, but because I no longer had any input there. When Ajahn Yatiko was
the work monk here, he had to put a lot of effort into making sure that
everything was done correctly on the work scene. But I have a suspicion
that Ajahn Yatiko, now living in Sri Lanka, isn't worried at all about
how we are handling the work scene at the moment.

These are some of the reasons why I think it's good to contemplate
death. These contemplations are especially helpful when we find
ourselves hooked into some minor thing we feel is so important. If we
were diagnosed with terminal cancer, then some trivial issue or a
difficulty with a particular person would probably seem insignificant.
So I encourage everyone to frequently bring up these contemplations on
death. And the next time you're sitting on the Ordination Platform for
pūjā, enjoy the beauty there, and consider, This pūjā may be my last.

# The Lesser Discourse on the Hole in the Ceiling

## Ajahn Jotipālo

### 11-20-12

In the earlier days, the Dhamma Hall was not quite as nice as it is now.
There was still carpet on the floor. One day Ajahn Amaro was giving a
talk when it was raining really hard, just as it was this morning. As he
was speaking, water started to leak from the ceiling and drip down right
in front of where I'm sitting now---in pretty much the same place as the
current leak we are having. Ajahn simply kept on giving the talk. It
wasn't as if nothing was happening, but the new leak became part of the
talk's theme of unexpectedness and uncertainty. I think he titled the
talk *The Greater Discourse on the Hole in the Ceiling*. The title alone
made it memorable.

A little drip like that may look like a minor issue, but people who
understand construction even a bit know that if there's a little drip
inside, there's a hole someplace on the outside. Maybe there's a hole
underneath a shingle and the water is getting in and flowing down into
the rafters. And the hole could be anywhere---it could be twenty feet
away from where the water is dripping into the hall. That water is
coming down and it's taking the path of least resistance. Maybe it hits
a two-by-four and goes a different direction, then twenty feet later it
hits another two-by-four. Meanwhile, inside the room here, the leak
looks like it might come from a little hole in the ceiling that we could
fix by putting a piece of tape over it. But a proper fix can be quite
complicated, and if it's not taken care of quickly, then it's possible
that all the water up there could saturate the drywall ceiling boards
and the whole ceiling could collapse. So even what looks like a little
drip can be quite serious.

This is often the case with a seemingly little issue like that. We can
always put a towel on the floor and ignore the drip, or use a bucket
temporarily as we've done right now. But the wise thing to do is to
investigate what's wrong and come up with an appropriate plan to fix it.
That could mean finding its root cause and fixing it ourselves, or
calling in a professional to help with the job.

The same is true in living the holy life, in our meditation practice,
and in developing Dhamma. There might be something on the surface,
manifesting in our behavior or attitudes---something that we notice, but
others don't. Or maybe other people notice something about us, but we
don't notice it ourselves. It could be minor. But if there is some
troublesome issue that is the underlying cause, it can fester and grow.
It can create many difficulties and problems for us and for other
people. So these things do need addressing. When something arises that
requires our attention, we first acknowledge it as being an issue, and
then investigate the extent of the problem it presents.

In some cases, we might not be able to fully see the problem or its
cause, or we may suspect the problem is bigger than what we can fix
ourselves. So with our Dhamma practice, when we have an inkling of that,
it's important to enlist others for help, maybe a teacher who can look
at the problem and help us work with it, undermine its cause, and
eventually master it. That is how we can prevent a little leak in our
practice from causing a large amount of suffering.

We can remember this talk as *The Lesser Discourse on the Hole in
the Ceiling*.

# The Protective Power of Truth

## Ajahn Jotipālo

### 11-22-13

In quite a few of our *paritta* chants there is the line *etena* s*acca*
*vajjena sotthi te hotu sabbadā*, which is roughly translated as, "by
the utterance of this truth may there be safety, protection." About a
month ago I was on my solo retreat reading a book about the stories
behind the parittas, the protective chants. And there was this really
touching tale from the *Quails Protection Chant* for warding off fires.
As the story goes, there is a baby quail that is alone in its nest out
in a field and a fire begins to approach the nest. The quail is too
young to take flight and not strong enough to get itself to the ground
and run off. Its parents are out foraging for food. The baby quail is
really in a desperate situation so it makes a statement of truth, which
is, "I'm alone, without my parents, I'm weak, I can't fly or run away,
and there is a huge fire approaching. By the utterance of this truth may
I be protected." In the story, the wind then shifts and the baby quail
is saved.

I was reflecting on this in terms of truth and honesty---really being
present for what is happening as well as taking stock of the situation
we're in. If there is some difficult interaction we have with someone,
we can try to catch our reactions before getting upset or offended and
try to relate to the truth of our experience. Sometimes when we state
the simple truth that, *This hurts*, we can cut it off right there. We
don't have to go any further into the difficult situation. And that's a
good thing, because if we did go into it further we'd likely complicate
the matter---*Why did this have to happen to me? It's not fair. I didn't
do anything to deserve this!---*and then get lost in negativity. So
instead of doing that, we can emulate the baby quail. Even if the wind
had not shifted and the quail had died, well at least he wasn't blaming
anyone, wallowing in self-pity, or being negative.

When Ajahn Sucitto was on *tudong* pilgrimage in India, a group of
robbers attacked him and the layperson he was traveling with. In a book
they later wrote together, Ajahn's traveling companion said of himself
that during the robbery he reacted like an animal, fighting and fleeing
out of fear. Ajahn Sucitto just stayed there with the robbers, quietly
and calmly dealing with them. When the leader of the robbers held an ax
over Ajahn's head and was about to murder him, Ajahn Sucitto calmly
recited, *Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa, "*Homage to
the Blessed, Noble, and Perfectly Enlightened One." He came into the
present moment, made an honest assessment of the situation, and found
himself truly ready to die. Needless to say, Ajahn lived to tell the
tale, and it might well be that his honest presence and devotional
recitation on that day was what preserved his life.

There is a real protection and power which we receive when, instead of
focusing on what might happen in a negative situation, we bring
ourselves into the present moment, honestly and truthfully being
available to the circumstances we find ourselves in. There is no need to
wait for fires or murderous robbers to confront us---we can take
advantage of this protective power in any moment of our day-to-day lives

# Being With Resistance

## Ajahn Jotipālo

### 11-23-12

In one of the Dhamma talks Ajahn Chandako gave recently, he said the
best way that we, as monastics, can support people in the world, support
ourselves, and support the people who support us, is to develop the
monastery and develop our individual practices. We can do this by
investigating our tendencies and mind states to see whether we are
moving toward contentment and communal harmony or if we are moving
toward a tendency to control---trying to push people around with our
words or attitudes, or trying to manipulate conditions to meet our
preferences. It's important to stop and ask ourselves, *What's the
tendency there? What's the mental habit?*

As we all know, during these fifteen-minute morning work meetings, the
work monk assigns a job to each of us. When I was a junior monk, I would
feel a tense sense of resistance during the entire meeting because there
were certain things I didn't like being asked to do. Years later, when I
became the work monk, these tendencies weren't there at all because I
had control. But even later, when it was again someone else who had the
work monk job, my tendency toward resistance came back. This is only an
example---a reminder that our tendencies to feel resistance, or any
unwholesome tendencies, simply arise out of causes and conditions. It's
important not to see them as wrong, but simply as tendencies of the
mind.

With that understanding, we can investigate what is happening for us in
the moment when resistance arises, and give ourselves space around the
feeling that is present. We don't need to push these experiences away by
bossing people around, trying to change things, or becoming reclusive.
Rather, we can look at the feeling of resistance and learn how to *be*
with it. We can observe how the feeling changes, or investigate the fear
that underlies resistance, breaking it all down. When we do this, it's
possible to see that there's nothing worth fighting against---there's
really nothing to be gained by being caught up in a mind state of
resistance.

# We Don't Have to Struggle

## Ajahn Jotipālo

### 11-29-13

Before coming to this practice, most of us had positive ideas about
meditation---that it brings peace and happiness, even bliss---and those
ideas are what motivated us to become practitioners. For many of us,
however, the reality is that meditation can often be a struggle, rather
than an experience of bliss and happiness. When we close our eyes,
there's can be a lot of physical or mental pain. Or there can be a sense
of pushing away from our experiences, or a general feeling of discomfort
and tension.

When I think about my own practice, what often creates the struggle I
experience in meditation is my attitude. I can have an attitude that I'm
only meditating to experience peace, not pain. That's a problem. So I
can ask myself, *Is it possible to drop that attitude and relax?* If I
can drop the attitude, I have the capacity to bring that sense of peace
and tranquility into one single moment---the present moment.

Alternatively, when we find we are unable to bear with a particular form
of pain, we can also turn our attention away from that pain. If there is
pain in the knee, for example, why put our attention on that if our
minds cannot hold a sense of steadiness around it? Why bring that into
our attention? Instead, we can find some other part of the body that is
not in pain so we can experience that feeling of present-moment peace
right there.

Ajahn Buddhadāssa used to talk about enlightenment in the sense of
experiencing this moment of peace with clarity and then becoming
familiar with that experience. Of course it is impermanent, it comes and
it goes, but it is a taste. And we can train the mind to incline towards
that state more and more often, to make it stretch out a little longer,
and return to it throughout the day. With training, this experience of
peace and clarity can become a touchstone for the mind, and we can turn
toward that in meditation when we find ourselves struggling with pain or
discomfort.

But the first thing to do when we find ourselves struggling, is to
remember that we do not have to struggle. Then we can focus on the body
or the breath or whatever it is for us that brings that sense of peace
and tranquility. Or we can reflect on any on of the Seven Factors of
Enlightenment*---*mindfulness, discernment, energy, rapture,
tranquility, concentration and equanimity---in order to establish a more
grounded state of mind.

There are many avenues we can take to cultivate the peace and happiness
in meditation which brought many of us to the practice in the first
place. And now that we have become committed to the practice, our job is
to explore those avenues for ourselves, to discover which ways lead to
the most fruitful results.

# Rehearsing the Mood

## Ajahn Jotipālo

### 12-07-13

In communicating with other people there is always room for mistakes to
be made and issues to come up around misunderstandings. When these
problems occur, we can sometimes find it helpful to seek advice from
someone else to help clarify what we want to say to the other person the
next time we speak with him or her. We do this so we are sure we will be
speaking factually, and at an appropriate time.

I was listening to a talk by Ajahn Soṇa and he gave a beautiful piece of
advice in regards to this type of situation. Once we are clear about
wishing to speak with someone in regards to a previous interaction,
Ajahn Sona suggested, "Don't rehearse the story or what we want to say;
instead, rehearse the mood, rehearse the state of mind we want to be in
when we speak."

Do we want to be experiencing anger when we speak to the other person?
If we really want to alienate ourselves and encourage that person to get
upset, then we can rehearse anger. But if we want to help the other
person or decrease tensions, then we can rehearse a compassionate mood
or one based on loving-kindness. We can encourage that in ourselves.

And this isn't only useful when we wish to speak with someone about an
issue. We can do this all the time. We can contemplate and encourage the
moods we wish to establish in our minds. While we are working with
someone, for example, we can ask ourselves, *What's the mood I want to
be in right now?* If we can deliberately generate a wholesome mood
within ourselves, we allow our minds to more easily open to the Dhamma.

# Snow on a Forest Trail

## Ajahn Jotipālo

### 12-08-13

This morning I was walking through the forest, on a path that I've
walked thousands of times before, and everything looked completely
different. Two conditions had changed: there was moisture in the air and
the temperature had dropped below freezing. This completely transformed
the path. Most of the trees were covered with heavy snow and ice. It was
quite beautiful.

I was contemplating this in terms of the characteristic of not-self, as
a reminder of how we can take our thoughts, moods, and opinions and
believe them to be who and what we are. We may have a thought and then
some reaction, like anger, but that anger is not who we are---it's
merely a transient phenomenon, like the snow on the trail. It's merely
the result of some condition that came into being. Whatever habitual
reactions we may have, they have been conditioned into us. They're all
due to past causes. And just like snow will melt given a certain
temperature, when the conditions change for us, our reactions may can
change.

I used to be bothered by a couple of people in the community, the way
they habitually reacted in certain situations. Then one day it hit me
that those people were merely reacting exactly as they'd been
conditioned to react in that particular situation. This has given me a
lot of space around difficult interactions that occur with other people,
and I've been able to recondition my own habitual reactions. When I
experience aversion to somebody, I can think to myself, *If they could
act differently they would act differently.*Or I might also think*, When
the conditions change, this may no longer be their habitual reaction.*It
can be that impersonal*.*

This is something we all can do. And when we encounter a situation with
that sort of wisdom, we can respond with compassion, equanimity, and
understanding, and not experience the dukkha of aversion. We can
transform our inner landscape, as with the snow fallen on a forest
trail.

# Not taking Refuge in the Weather

## Ajahn Jotipālo

### 12-23-12

On mornings like this---when it's pouring down rain, when it's not
comfortably warm, and we have been assigned a job working outside which
will be wet and inconvenient---in this situation, the mind may rebel or
complain.

It was quite a cold morning and pouring down rain during the first work
meeting I attended at Abhayagiri. Everybody was going to be working
outside because of last minute preparations for the winter retreat.
Before the work began we were gathered together listening to Ajahn
Pasanno's morning reflection. The mood in the room was pretty glum when
Ajahn said to us, "Well, it's a good thing we don't take refuge in the
weather." When he said that, my mood immediately changed. We were only
going to get wet, that's all. We had places to dry our clothes and we
would be outside for only a couple hours. Plus it was going to be really
good work, a substantial service to the monastery.

Ajahn Pasanno's comment has stuck with me over time, and has encouraged
me to question myself, *What am I taking refuge in? Is it the work I'm
doing? The relationships I'm cultivating? Am I taking refuge in wanting
to feel good and not being inconvenienced in body or mind?* After
reflecting like that it can be easy to set aside my aversion to rain. On
days when there are tasks I don't want to do, I can look at my
perceptions and ask myself, *What am I taking refuge in? What
assumptions am I making? How can I see this situation from a different
perspective so that I might incline my mind towards a brighter state?*
When I reflect in this way, the work period or the task I'm attending to
can be quite enjoyable.
