# When the Mango Picking Pole Is Too Long

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-12-13

Sometimes we feel compelled to be think, figure things out, analyze what
we're doing, marshal all the logical reasons for directing our practice
in a particular way. But in the end, it's simply busyness. And an
important part of our practice is developing skills that prevent the
mind from being trapped in busyness like that.

Ajahn Chah used the example of picking mangoes. In Thailand, mangoes are
picked by using a long bamboo pole with a little basket at the end.
Usually the mangos are on branches fifteen or twenty feet from the
ground. Ajahn Chah would say, "If our mango pole is twenty-five or
thirty feet, it is much too long for the task. When considering what
things could advance our practice, we might think having a Ph.D. or
being really smart would help. But that may be like having too long a
pole: too much thinking, too much intelligence, too much of figuring
things out. It may not be what is needed."

We do need to use reflection and investigation to understand our
experiences. But that reflection and investigation needs to be
appropriate and balanced. In the same way that picking mangoes requires
a pole that's been cut to the proper length, we need to tailor our
thought processes to the task at hand. And the task at hand is
understanding: *How do I not suffer? How do I not create problems? How
do I not increase my suffering and confusion?* Those questions are more
important than, *Do I have all the information I need? Should I think
more about my problem? What logic can I use to figure it out?* This can
be mental overkill---more that what the Buddha would have us do.

Instead, we can learn to maintain a balance in our use of thinking and
logical analysis. We do this by paying close attention to what it is
that is useful in helping us prevent and ease suffering and confusion.
We can learn to apply thought at the right time and in the right amount,
and how to let go of thought when it's not necessary.

# Desire Creeps In

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-24-12

It's worthwhile to watch the habits of desire and craving that keep
creeping into the mind. Really notice and pay attention to desire,
because it's insidious.

This isn't meant as a commentary on anyone's inability to recognize or
understand desire or to work with it, but simply to say that it takes
our concerted attention and a willingness to investigate to see how
desire keeps creeping in. Most importantly, we need to be patient and
willing to work with the different ways that desire comes up. Don't
assume that because you've made a resolution,*Oh, I really want to free
myself from desire,* that it's not going to manifest in various ways.
Try to be very practical and attentive. Desire always seeks an
object---that's the way the mind works. It goes to an object and becomes
interested.

A prime example is the desire for food. In one psychology study I read,
researchers tested two groups: one with fewer varieties of candy put out
in front of them and one with more varieties of candy. Participants in
the group with the increased varieties of candy ate sixty-nine percent
more. One of the issues this may illustrate is how desire can increase
our habit of craving based simply on seeing a greater variety.

I read about another researcher who'd written a paper on desire and
advertising. One day he was in a supermarket checkout line ready to buy
a sealed box containing ten packs of chewing gum. The box was labeled
something like, *Ten Packs for Two Dollars*. A colleague who was with
him at the time said, "Hey, you've just written a paper on this!" People
get pulled into such things. They see *Ten for Two Dollars,* and think,
*Wow, just twenty cents each---what a great deal!* They might not want
to buy one pack for twenty cents, yet they get hooked into buying ten!
It's merely marketing stimulating desire. So even a researcher who'd
studied and written about this very thing–even he was hooked. Desire
comes up.

That's just the way the mind works. Recognize that it's not personal;
it's simply that desire seeks an object. Our job is to be attentive,
reflective, and willing to investigate; to watch how desire keeps
hopping around looking for an object, looking for
something---*anything*---it can be attracted to.

We investigate, but not in a harsh way. We do this by taking an attitude
of curiosity about desire, rather than feeling we have to run around
with a sledgehammer and annihilate it. By paying attention to desire and
recognizing what desire is doing, we can see how silly it is when we get
hooked. You can ask yourself, *How dumb can I get?*That's the way to
step back from it---by seeing desire clearly and not making a problem of
it.

# Containing The Chicken

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-20-12

The theme we used for *Upāsikā* Day yesterday was brightening the mind
and focusing on the ten anussati---the Ten Recollections: Buddha;
Dhamma; Saṅgha; virtue; generosity; celestial beings; mindfulness of the
body; mindfulness of death; mindfulness of breathing; and
Nibbana---peace. Several people expressed their appreciation for being
taught about the Ten Recollections in that it gave them more freedom and
flexibility to work with the mind.

Meditation can often become mechanical or method oriented, or focus
solely on concentration and trying to get the mind to stop thinking.
Sometimes when we practice like this, there tends to be a lot of effort
expended, and this can agitate the mind. However, the Buddha taught ways
of using the thought process so that it supports the cultivation of
wholesome and bright states of mind. Thinking in this way naturally
leads the mind to settle down. The mind naturally settles when it feels
good, when there's a quality of well-being. We encourage this by
bringing to mind directed thought and attention and evaluating the
result of that. When we do this, there can be a continuity of wholesome
and skillful thoughts, and the mind can become settled and clear.

Ajahn Chah said that meditation is like containing a chicken. In a
village, when a person has a chicken and is concerned that it's going to
run off, he gets a loosely woven large bamboo basket and plunks it over
the chicken. Rice can be put in the basket, and the chicken stays in the
container. One doesn't have to tie the chicken down or keep it from
taking a step anywhere. Having a container for the chicken is
sufficient. In the same way, when the mind is imbued with a sphere of
awareness and intention, and attention is being directed on a wholesome
theme, then the mind will stay within that container. It doesn't mean
that it's forced to stay there, but it's content within that sphere. And
these recollections are a skillful means of directing attention,
bringing wholesome recollections to the mind so it will settle within
that container.

Both in our formal meditation practice and throughout the day we can
bring to mind and recollect the Buddha, the Dhamma, the Saṅgha, virtue,
generosity, celestial beings, the body, death, in- and out-breathing,
and Nibbana---peace. Another helpful theme that is not on this list is
the quality of saṁvega, spiritual urgency or a chastening of worldly
tendencies. This can help remind us of death and the limitations of the
body. A complementary theme for saṁvega is to set up the intention to
put forth effort, to realize what the Buddha taught and the example that
he set. Another important quality that comes to mind is pasāda, which is
a sense of serene confidence and clarity of well being; it has a joyful
sense to it.

We want to encourage these ten recollections in our practice as well as
these other skillful qualities so that we create a wholesome foundation
for the mind. We have a lot of space to experiment and work with these
themes. As we get to know them, we can see what works and what helps the
mind direct itself towards the Dhamma.

# The Dhamma of Contentment

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-30-12

Contentment is a good theme for all of us to consider. In doing so we
want to learn how to be content with the circumstances around us, as
well as with our own minds, internally.

Most of the agitation, negativity, and faultfinding that the mind cranks
out is not so much about any big event that's happening outside. Almost
invariably, it is a lack of internal contentment. When the mind is
internally unable to find contentment, externally it finds something to
be excited about, upset about, agitated about, or have an opinion about.
It's usually really believable! We come up with the logic and all of the
good reasons to justify our states of mind. There are plenty of good
reasons if we look for them. But oftentimes, what's overlooked is the
question, *Why can't I be content with this present moment, with this
circumstance, with my mind and feelings as they are?*

This is a very important investigation. It's a fundamental basis for
progress in practice. Until we learn how to direct our attention in that
way, we're almost always driven by discontent and end up being caught up
in some sort of sensual fantasy or internal rant or something that, at
the very least, takes us out of the present moment. The challenge is to
be able to draw attention to what's arising and investigate: *How can I
be content with this present moment? How can I be content with myself?*

When the Buddha talked about being a refuge unto ourselves and taking
Dhamma as a refuge, he didn't mean that we take refuge in the Dhamma of
discontent. Our refuge is in the Dhamma of contentment, the ability to
not be pulled away from the present moment. This is absolutely essential
when we're talking about meditation---for the mind to become settled,
peaceful, and still we need to have the ability to be content with the
breath or some other meditation object. In the *suttas*, the Buddha
describes contentment as one of the characteristics of a great being or
a noble one, an *Arya*. We learn to be content with our robes, almsfood,
lodging, and with our cultivation, our development of meditation.

This aspect of contentment is a fruitful area for investigation. We can
experiment with it and find ways to draw our hearts closer to that
quality.

# Being Comfortable Is Not the End of Suffering

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-08-13

There's an element of the human psyche that is constantly looking for
comfort, security, and ease. And we can sometimes believe that the end
of suffering is when we bring about the circumstances in which we don't
have to extend ourselves or put forth too much effort. But even when
we've managed to manipulate conditions in a way that allow us to feel
relatively comfortable and laid back, we inevitably realize that we are
still suffering.

That's why, as practitioners, we need to be willing to stretch our
capabilities and constantly look for ways that help us to do that.
Whether we're on retreat or engaged with each other in the monastery's
communal routine, we need to keep experimenting and working with
different practices to stretch ourselves further.

Of course, there should be a balance in our efforts; constantly pushing
and striving is itself a form of suffering. This is why the Buddha
pointed to the Middle Way. So, rather than investigating what it is that
makes us feel relatively comfortable and secure, we can investigate what
it is that undermines the tendencies of greed, hatred and delusion. We
need to look very carefully, asking ourselves, *What are those
underlying roots of delusion? What are those habits of selfishness?* By
investigating like this, we learn that we don't need to be tripped up by
our habits or defilements; we learn to be okay with whatever conditions
arise. And when that happens, we find *true* ease and comfort.

So it's important to investigate in these ways and to stretch our
capabilities. Whether we are developing our formal, solitary practice or
engaged in our communal duties, we try to let go of that sense of
comfort seeking and undermine the underlying tendencies that cause us
complication and difficulty.

# It's Not a Sure Thing

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-17-12

It is the commemoration of Ajahn Chah's birthday today. One of the
constant refrains in his teaching and training is the recollection of
the Thai phrase, *mynair*---unsure, uncertain, not a sure thing. We can
develop the ability to hold experience in this space of not sure and
uncertainty. Often the mind inclines to some sort of story: *It's going
to be just like this; this is going to be really wonderful; that is
going to be great.* But the challenge is remembering that it's just a
story, it's not a sure thing. The mind can also buy into: *It's going to
be awful; it's going to be dreadful; how am I going to bear with this?*
What can help us with this is thinking: *it's not a sure thing.* We
develop the ability to hold experience within the framework of
mindfulness, reflection, investigation, and discernment and openly
acknowledge that we're not sure what it's going to be like. When we hold
experience in this way, we find that everything is bearable, everything
is quite all right---we are creating a framework of Dhamma rather than a
framework of our own reactions and habits.

# When Help Is Needed

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-16-12

One focus of our practice is to look after each other and help each
other out. In one discourse where the Buddha finds Venerable Anuruddha
and his friends living in the forest, we see that they are intent on
formal practice; but whenever something needs to be done, they come out
of meditation and help each other. That is a very beautiful story from
the suttas. Our tendency, however, is to try doing everything by
ourselves, which is usually not so comfortable. But when we learn to
help each other, it's much more convenient for everyone. It's like the
convenience of using two hands to wash. When one hand is trying to wash
itself, the job takes quite a while and is less than thorough. But with
two hands washing each other, it's quicker and everything gets clean.

Similarly, as human beings living together with duties and chores, we
can learn to look out for the many ways we can help one another. A lot
of this practice comes from the cultivation of mindfulness, of paying
attention. It's so easy to have our blinders on and think, *I'm only
doing this task, this is what I'm doing.* We don't have enough attention
and clear comprehension to reflect and ask ourselves, *What are other
people doing? Do they need assistance? Is there some way I can help
out?*

When we reflect like this for the sake of others, it helps us cultivate
mindfulness. And it is also a way we can step outside of ourselves. So
often we set boundaries---me and my autonomous self. While this can have
a useful function, it can also be quite limiting and isolating, and
sometimes leads to selfish behavior. What we are doing instead is
learning how to let go of the fixation on I, me, and mine---to
relinquish that self-centric modality of living in the world. This
fixation, the Buddha said, is one of the main sources of *dukkha*. By
looking out to see how we can be of assistance to others, we undermine
that modality and give ourselves the opportunity to experience
well-being.

# Mindfulness with Clarity and Discernment

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-28-12

Yesterday at tea time, we were talking about *sampajañña*, clear
comprehension, which is a quality we can reflect on in our daily
practice. When the Buddha speaks about mindfulness---*sati*---he rarely
treats mindfulness as an isolated quality. It's usually in conjunction
with some other quality---particularly, clear comprehension,
*sati-sampajañña*. Without clear comprehension, our mindfulness tends to
be rather narrowly focused. We can forget that the Buddha is encouraging
us to have a broadness of attention and awareness and a reflective
quality while we are cultivating mindfulness. So we need to make clear
comprehension an integral part of our cultivation and development of
mindfulness.

Clear comprehension has different functions, duties, and purposes. There
is clear comprehension of the object of our attention, but there are
many other aspects as well. For instance, the sense of being free of
delusion is one example of sampajañña operating within the mind. With
non-delusion we have a sense of clearly comprehending our biases or lack
of biases and refraining from bringing a self-position into our
experiences.

We can also clearly comprehend how to practice in a way that's in
keeping with whatever time and place we happen to be in. Ajahn Chah used
to give a classic example of this having to do with a senior monk who
would visit him at his monastery. In the morning they would go on alms
round together into one of the villages around Wat Pah Pong. Ajahn Chah
said that this was often a source of slight irritation, because,
although this monk was very mindful, he didn't clearly comprehend the
situation. As the visiting monk would lead a group on alms round, he
would mindfully walk towards a buffalo pen, because he didn't notice
that he wasn't walking on the road anymore. Or, while he was being very
focused, he would fail to recognize that he was walking on the left side
of the road and all of the villagers were waiting off to the right side
of the road. He would mindfully walk past them and start heading off
into the paddy fields. Ajahn Chah would say, "Go right, go right," or
"Go left, go left." Mindfulness requires clear comprehension so that we
are aware of the appropriate time and place in each circumstance.

Another aspect of clear comprehension pertains to the different
personalities and temperaments people have. Different people need
attending to in different ways, and we need to adjust our actions and
attitudes accordingly. Otherwise we may offend, upset, or miscommunicate
with the people around us. Clear comprehension allows us to see how to
choose the best response for each person we interact with.

In the *Visuddhimagga*, Ācariya Buddhaghosa, suggests that sampajañña is
a synonym for discernment; specifically, it's the discernment we use to
determine what Dhamma to apply, depending on the situation we're in and
the experience that's arising for us.

As we go about our day, we use reflective awareness to get the best
sense of how to apply sati-sampajañña*.*We do not need to apply
mindfulness and clear comprehension in a mechanical way. When we do our
daily chanting, we recollect the qualities of the Dhamma, and one of
these qualities is *opanayiko*: leading inwards. The function of our
practice is to draw our attention inwards; to draw the world and
interaction with the world around us, inwards. That is how we are able
to hold things with clarity and discernment, applying sati-sampajañña to
see the Dhamma clearly.

# Is Rock Climbing Like Meditation?

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-21-13

As Dhamma practitioners, we need to continually turn our attention to
contemplation, reflection, investigation---to consider things
carefully---and not just in formal meditation, but also as we go about
our more mundane activities. These days, even in the mainstream media,
it's popular to talk about "being in the present moment, being in the
here and now." It sounds very good, but if that's all we practice, we
can be left without having reflected or investigated to any great
degree.

We need to apply some discernment. When we experience difficulty,
conflict or dis-ease, we direct our attention toward that, investigate
its causes, and examine the process by which it is unfolding. This is
not to say we should be reaching out intellectually and coming up with
rational explanations; rather, it is being willing to investigate and
bring one's attention to the matter at hand.

Once when Ajahn Chah was visiting the U.S., someone asked him a question
about the need for sitting meditation: "I have a friend whose meditation
is rock climbing. He doesn't have to sit in meditation to concentrate
his mind. Why do we have to sit in meditation? Couldn't we do something
like rock climbing---anything that puts us in the present moment?" Then
Ajahn Chah asked him, "When your friend is rock climbing, does he
contemplate the Four Noble Truths?"

We can be in the present moment, we can be clear, but are we developing
discernment and learning to understand the nature of the mind, the
nature of conditions? We mustn't be satisfied with merely cultivating
calm and clarity; rather, that calm and clarity needs to be put to work.
And its work is developing discernment and understanding. That's the
crux of our practice. Take the illuminating idiom, "truth-discerning
awareness." It's not just about awareness---it's awareness with
discernment.

To develop this discernment we can begin by asking ourselves, *What is
the nature of things?---the nature of conditions?---the nature of my own
mind?* Then we bring the attention inwards and focus our awareness on
the various feelings that are present. In particular, we attend to the
feelings of dis-ease, dissatisfaction, or suffering and come to
understand that those feelings are merely feelings. And with any
particular feeling we have we ask ourselves, *What are the causal
conditions for that feeling? Where is its resolution? How can I help
bring about that resolution?* In this way, we are contemplating the Four
Noble Truths exactly as the Buddha intended.

# The Paradox of Urgency

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 10-10-13

We may feel there exists a paradox or inconsistency having to do with
some of the teachings that guide our spiritual practice and how we
conduct our daily lives. First we're told it's important to have a sense
of urgency, and then we're told to relax, let go, and cultivate a
feeling of spaciousness.

On one side, the Buddha encourages us to cultivate the quality of
*saṁvega*, which is usually translated as "a sense of spiritual
urgency." It's the recognition that life is short and everything is
uncertain, so we need to take this practice seriously. We urgently need
to apply our attention and effort in order to fulfill the teachings and
not miss out on the opportunity we have.

On the other side, we need to learn how to relax and not get caught up
in the feeling of urgency. We tend to pile stuff onto ourselves,
thinking, *I have to get this done and that done and ...* Or we might
feel an urgency with regard to future planning: *We have to have a
budget meeting, and we have to have an insurance meeting, and we have to
have a business meeting, and ...* This agitating sort of urgency can
arise not only with our chores and duties, but with our internal
spiritual practice as well: *I have to get my mindfulness of breathing
straight, and keep my reflections going, and ...* With this sense of
urgency in trying to do everything all at once, we end up becoming
frantic, and, ironically, very little gets done well or efficiently---it
really doesn't work. So instead we can remind ourselves, *Hey, it's just
one thing at a time, one moment at a time, one breath at a time.* We can
learn to create some space for ourselves and not carry the "I have to"
tendency around with us; nor the impulse that tells us that everything
is so urgent.

As we reflect on these seemingly paradoxical qualities of urgency and
spaciousness, we may find that they are not inconsistent after all. We
can apply both of them in our practice, with a sense of balance,
emphasizing one or the other depending on the circumstances. In doing
so, we need to come from a place of clarity and steadiness. Clarity is
needed to anchor spaciousness and letting go, and to guide those actions
that arise out of a sense of urgency. Steadiness is needed to bring good
results from those actions, and to keep spaciousness from turning into
spacing out. This place of clarity and steadiness is where paradoxes
like these dissolve and fade away.

# Paying Attention to Details

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-15-12

When bringing Dhamma practice into our daily lives, it's important that
we pay attention to the ordinary little details around us. If we hold to
a broad, nebulous "just be mindful" attitude, we're unlikely to be clear
about what we're doing. So it's important to keep ourselves from
overlooking things, especially while living in community as we do here
at the monastery.

Through our attention to ordinary details, we cultivate an attitude of
mindfulness that's sharp and connected with what's happening around
us---an attitude that is central to our training. Over time, this
attitude permeates the way we relate to our minds and our experiences.
And that's critical, because our defilements don't advertise themselves
by holding up big signs that say, "*Greed! Hatred! Delusion!*" So, we
need to look closely if we're to discern and understand the nuances of
the attachment and delusion we experience. If we haven't cultivated the
habit of paying attention to details---both external and internal---if
we don't put forth the extra effort required for that, then we'll miss
many significant aspects of our practice.

The Buddha pointed to *yoniso manasikāra*as a vital part of the path. It
refers to skillful and wise reflection and close attention to the root
of things. This quality doesn't pop up by itself like a mushroom in the
fall; it has to be cultivated. In our ordinary day-to-day activities, we
can support this cultivation by, again, paying attention to details. We
do this, for instance, by making a continuous effort to notice when any
little thing needs doing, such as returning a tool to its proper place,
and then doing what's called for, even if it's not "our job." When
everyone pays attention and takes responsibility like that, the
monastery functions beautifully.

The Buddha based this entire path of liberation upon the experience of
dissatisfaction, discomfort, stress, suffering---*dukkha*. Paying
attention to details is a doorway though which we can learn what leads
to dukkha and what doesn't. While it may seem like a small thing, this
attention is essential if we're to live our lives skillfully and in a
way that opens us to the possibility of true peace and freedom.

# Approaching Gorillas

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-22-12

Bring mindfulness to your day-to-day activities. We need to keep
reminding ourselves of that. It's easy to say to ourselves, *Just be
mindful.* But we hear it so often that it can seem trite and can lose
its impact. The practice of mindfulness, the application of mindfulness,
learning how to direct mindfulness, are key foundations of our practice
and training. Once we learn how to establish and balance mindfulness, we
can more clearly understand the mind and its reactions.

The biologist George Schaller was the first person to study silverback
mountain gorillas. People who read his studies were amazed that he was
able to get close enough to the gorillas to observe their habits and
social structure and even the primitive language they used. People would
ask how he was able to achieve this. His answer was that he approached
the gorillas in a manner that was very different from the way others had
tried and failed: he never carried a gun. This allowed him to establish
a trusting relationship with the gorillas and approach them with a sense
of ease.

Now, think of what our minds are doing all the time. We carry weapons
around–our "guns" of views and opinions, our moods and biases, our
reactivity, and all our extra baggage. They keep us from getting close
enough to clearly see what the mind is doing, its underlying tendencies,
or what its potential capability might be. We're not able to approach
our experience mindfully.

We need to put down the weapons of our likes and dislikes, our views and
opinions, and the constant chatter and commentary that we're always
overlaying onto the world around us. These weapons constantly separate
us from the world and from our experience. Once we've put our weapons
down, we can take up the fundamental quality of mindfulness: we can pay
attention and be aware without moving in with reactivity. That way, we
can begin to establish a quality of real peace, while also learning to
coexist with our own minds.

# A Superior Resolve

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-10-13

Yesterday, four senior monks from Abhayagiri participated in the
ordination at the City of 10,000 Buddhas. The preceptor was Reverend
Heng Sure. As he was instructing the candidates, he kept using a certain
refrain: "There is inferior resolve, medium resolve, and superior
resolve." The examples he gave of inferior and medium resolve were
humorous, so as to encourage the prospective monks to take on superior
resolve.

It's helpful to reflect on what it means to make a resolution and to
understand that the way we resolve to do something is going to condition
the result. Whether it's about ordaining or simply helping with the
dishes, we're constantly resolving to undertake specific activities. We
set up in our minds a firm resolve to do the thing we want done, and
then pay attention to the result that resolve has on our actions. When
we don't do that, the mind tends to wander, drift, and get lost and
scattered; we forget about our resolve to stick with whatever it is that
we're doing.

It is important to develop the ability of attending to and following
through on our resolutions. That's because, after setting our resolve
concerning some activity, we often find ourselves experiencing
restlessness or boredom when actually engaged in that activity---whether
it's meditation or some mundane task. When that happens, we end up
replacing what we're doing with something else, and the cycle begins
again.

There's the idiom that nature abhors a vacuum. When we leave a vacuum in
the mind, it tends to fill up with habits that aren't very useful. We
can help prevent that from happening by filling the vacuum with the
sense of resolve. We can bring up specific resolutions and follow
through on them. We can investigate the very nature of resolutions,
asking ourselves, *What am I undertaking? Why am I undertaking it? What
are the results of my intentions?*

In essence, we are resolving to take an interest in what we are
doing---to be interested in the process of being present and applying
ourselves to the activities at hand. That kind of resolve allows the
mind to be buoyant and uplifted. And if we sustain this practice, the
mind will become easily settled and clear. It's all about learning to
bring about superior resolve and holding that resolve with understanding
and discernment.

# An Auspicious Day of Blessings

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-13-12

Today is Friday the 13^th^, and by tradition some people believe that
it's an unlucky day. And many people have different ideas of why Friday
the 13^th^ became known as an unlucky day. In the Thai tradition and the
Asian tradition in general, there are lucky days, unlucky days,
auspicious and inauspicious times. Ajahn Chah used to say that whatever
day we are doing something wholesome, that is an auspicious day. He also
said there is no such thing as a day in and of itself that is
inauspicious or unlucky. We are completely dependent on gathering our
own resources into doing something that is skillful, beneficial and
wholesome. So the opportunity for doing that which is wholesome is in
itself what makes it a blessing in the world. The Pāḷi word
*mahāmaṅgala* means the highest blessings. The Mahāmaṅgala Sutta
encourages the cultivation of that which is skillful: association with
good people and developing inner virtues that are beneficial to both
ourselves and others. When we cultivate these virtues, we create the
blessings of a skillful life, sharing those blessings with the people
we're living with and the people we come into contact with. And that is
how we bring great blessings into the world.

# Developing Respect and Humility

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-26-13

Before the monastery was established, I can remember Ajahn Amaro telling
me that there was a Thai monk in Fremont, Ajahn Mahaprasert, who was
keen to see a forest monastery succeed in the Bay Area. Since the
founding of the monastery, Ajahn Mahaprasert's support has been
unfailing.

Generally, in Thailand, at the beginning of the Rains Retreat or a bit
earlier than that, most of the monks in monasteries will go together to
pay respects to senior monks in the same province. This is important for
a monastery and for one's individual practice. These trips are
opportunities for showing respect and giving respect outside of one's
own little circles as well as within one's circle. In America, we don't
have many options, but we do have Ajahn Mahaprasert. We're fortunate,
because he's a worthy monk to pay respects to.

When we reflect back on the discourse that the Buddha gave on the
highest blessings, one blessing he points to is *gāravo ca nivāto ca,*
the qualities of respectfulness and humility. These are qualities that
bring forth the highest blessings. They engender the sense of not having
to carry the burden of a sense of self all the time---which *is* an
incredible burden. Sometimes we can lack humility and respect to the
degree that we outwardly appear full of ourselves and carry our sense of
self around showing it off to other people---which is not very
inspiring.

We have the opportunity to establish a sense of respectfulness and
humility not just once a year, but in our day-to-day lives: How we live
with each other, how we treat each other, and how we engage with the
world around us. So often we're thinking about meditation techniques and
methodologies. But when we reflect on the qualities that help the mind
become peaceful, we can see how often we overlook these fundamentals
that are at the roots of our being---these qualities of respectfulness
and humility that allow the mind to become quiet, at ease, and easily
peaceful. If we've engendered these qualities within, then when we sit
down to meditate, we don't have to wonder what techniques or methods
will make us peaceful, because the peace is already there waiting for
us.

# Practicing What Works

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-23-13

When we reflect on the best way to practice, it's good to focus on what
works for us. We may read about various techniques and methods and
wonder which is the right one for us. We can ask ourselves, *What have I
done that works? What has helped the mind relinquish its attachments and
defilements? What has helped the mind become more peaceful, settled, and
clear?*

As we practice, we come to realize what works for us will change,
depending on conditions. Simply because something worked today doesn't
mean it's going to work tomorrow, *and* what didn't work in the past
*may* work for us now. This makes it necessary to adapt and experiment.
Ajahn Chah used to repeat a quote from one of his teachers, Ajahn Tong
Rat, who taught that the practice is very straightforward and easy: "If
the defilements come high, then duck; if they come low, jump." Within
the bounds of *sīla,*morality, we practice with whatever the situation
demands---whatever works---as long as it has a wholesome outcome. This
entails asking ourselves, *How might I work with this particular
situation?* Once we have a sense of what might be a proper approach, we
put it into practice and evaluate the results.

This points to an ongoing, evolving relationship between how we practice
and how the mind works within this practice. It takes time to discover
skillful ways of engaging with that relationship; it's a learning
process. But by sticking with this process, by taking a genuine interest
in it, we can develop a good sense of what practices are truly
beneficial---what truly works for us.

# Directing Attention Skillfully

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 04-15-05

Learning how to meditate---how to develop the mind---is learning how to
direct attention in a skillful way. Whatever we direct our attention
toward becomes our reality. If we like, we can direct attention to all
the chaos in the world or to the chaos of our own personal dramas. But
we don't have to do that. We can instead direct our minds to contemplate
our experiences as merely form, feeling, perception, mental formations,
and consciousness. We can direct our attention in other skillful ways as
well---toward objects that soothe the mind and conduce to peace and
clarity. It's simple: We can incline the mind toward what is wholesome
or what is troublesome. The choice we make is up to each one of us.

# Solitude and Engagement

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-23-05

With Luang Por Sumedho visiting, this last week has been a full one,
with lots of contact and engagement. That's the nature of monastic life;
even though there's an underlying foundation of simplicity, one goes
through various phases of solitude and group activity. It's important to
make a conscious effort to bring things back to a life of more solitude
and less engagement. It's interesting to see how the mind picks up a
particular way of relating and then rolls along with it. So we need to
make that conscious effort to pull back.

It's not as if engagement is bad---it's been a wonderful and fruitful
time with Luang Por Sumedho here. But I think it's time to bring the
mind back in and ask how we can integrate his inspiring presence into
our lives. How do we actually live with awakened attention? How do we
put our day-to-day lives on the line and make them examples of clear
knowing, clear seeing? This is what he's talking about. To hear these
words and then carry on with a scattered, miserable existence doesn't
really cut it. How can we keep recollecting and applying these
teachings, particularly in the next couple of days? We do our chores, we
do our duties, and we do what needs to be done. But we should also try
to give ourselves more time for solitude and let the teachings of Luang
Por take root in the heart.

# Sweep What's in Front of Your Broom

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-09-12

We have a very full schedule here at the monastery over the coming days.
That's how it is, sometimes there's a lot happening. When this occurs,
it's helpful to have a perspective that doesn't make things complicated
or difficult.

I remember at Wat Nanachat, one of the things visitors were asked to do
in the morning, while the monks were out on alms round, was to sweep the
monastery grounds---and it's a fairly large monastery. One morning,
while an *anagārika* was sweeping, a new guest came out, looked at the
grounds, and said, "Are we supposed to sweep all of this?" The anagārika
replied, "No, just what's in front of your broom." It's helpful to keep
this sort of perspective.

But we can easily stray from that and tell ourselves, *Oh, there's this
to do, and that to do; there's this person, and then that person.*It
turns into something that sounds complicated and overwhelming. In the
end, though, it's just the person in front of us that we're dealing
with, the particular chore or task that needs to be done now, breathing
in and breathing out, moment by moment.

Here in the monastery, once the morning work period is over and the meal
is finished, then there's the afternoon. Take the time in the afternoon
for meditation, for reading Dhamma, for some quiet time. No need to
think about the things that may need doing in the future.

Remember that it's only what's in front of us that needs to be done. As
we maintain that perspective, we realize that things do get done. They
may not get done as quickly as we wish, or in the way we think they
ought to be done, but we can only do what we're doing. It's helpful if
we don't lose ourselves in a lot of thinking and complication.

That's a big part of personal practice. Without that we might start
thinking of all of the things we need to do to become a proficient
meditator or practitioner: *I've got to get my precepts down, learn the
Vinaya, learn the chanting; get this meditation technique, and that
meditation technique, and this other one I haven't even tried yet; and
there's this reflection and that understanding of this aspect of
Buddhist philosophy.*And then we might think, *Oh, this is hopeless. I'm
just giving myself more suffering and more difficulty than I ever had
before!*

But if we drop all of that and attend to just one breath at a time, to
one mental state at a time, and that's all---if we can attend to things
from that perspective---then everything is doable.

# Facilitating Harmony

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 10-18-13

In several suttas, the Buddha points to *cāga* as a quality that
facilitates harmony. Cāga is an interesting word. It means "giving" or
"sharing" and also "giving up." So it's not only the quality of
generosity, but also the ability to give up our fears, views, and
opinions---things that end up creating moods and feelings of disharmony.

Another quality the Buddha points to that facilitates harmony is
*piyavācā–*endearing, timely, and kindly speech. We use piyavācā in all
our interactions, such as when we express our wishes, needs, and
requests. With piyavācā*,*it is said, our speech will be "loved by
many."

It can be a challenge to apply piyavācā when we're tired or when we're
dealing with a lot of people at the same time. Cāga, too, can be
difficult, especially when we're feeling stressed or fearful. But
they're both part of the training. We train to recognize when our speech
isn't endearing or kind and then we reestablish our intention and start
again. Likewise, we train to recognize our resistance to sharing or
giving up and then make an effort to let go. By starting over with a new
intention of cāga or piyavācā*,* we again place ourselves in a position
of creating harmony.

# Which Practice Is Right For Me?

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 04-27-13

After the meal today we will be taking formal leave of Ajahn Sucitto.
Living as we do in an American Buddhist monastery, we're in a distinct
minority and rather isolated. So when visiting teachers like Ajahn
Sucitto come here and talk about specific practice experiences they've
had, it's a precious opportunity for us. Having listened to them
carefully, we can then reflect on our own experience, asking ourselves:
*What have I done that works? What has been beneficial? What has helped
the mind relinquish its attachments and defilements? What has helped the
mind become more peaceful, settled and clear?*It's not something we can
learn from a book, reading about some theory and trying to make sense of
it. Rather, it's about paying attention to this element of
experience---our own experiences and the experiences of others. For
instance, when Ajahn Dtun visited here recently, the teachings he
offered were always conveyed in terms of his own practice: "This was my
experience. This was the practice I used. This is what worked for me."
After listening to teachings like that, we may be inspired to apply some
of the practices described. But if we do, it's important that we attend
to what genuinely works and examine this in our daily lives,
interactions, and formal practice.

To put it another way, we can ask ourselves, *What is it that aligns us
with Dhamma?* The Buddha tells us that if something aligns or accords
with the Dhamma, it's going to increase our happiness, wellbeing,
clarity, and understanding. The opposite is true as well. When what
we're doing increases our *dukkha*---our anxieties, confusion, and
agitation---it's a pretty sure bet that we're not aligned with the
Dhamma. Trying to emulate a practice used by a respected teacher may
seem like a fine idea, but the test is whether applying that practice
accords with the Dhamma *for you---*in your own, personal experience.

To employ this test skillfully takes practice, reflection, and a
willingness to experiment and try things out. But it's something we need
to do. Practicing Dhamma in accordance with Dhamma---*dhammānudhamma
paṭipatti---*is a quality that needs our close attention. In fact, it's
a key element of stream entry. So as we go about our daily lives, as we
continue to cultivate the practice, it is helpful to reflect: *Does what
I'm doing accord with Dhamma? What I'm saying, thinking, and
feeling---does it accord with Dhamma?* If we are willing to investigate
these questions closely, their answers will help us clarify whether our
particular practices are leading us in the right direction.

It's important to also understand that what works for us will change,
depending on conditions. For instance, just because something worked
today doesn't mean it's going to work tomorrow, and what didn't work in
the past may work for us now. This makes it necessary for us to adapt
and experiment. Often Ajahn Chah would repeat a quote from one of his
teachers, Ajahn Tong Rat, who taught that the practice is very
straightforward and easy: "If the defilements come high, then duck; if
they come low, jump." In other words, we're to do whatever the situation
demands---whatever works as long as it is not causing ourselves or
others more suffering. This entails first asking ourselves, *How might I
work with this particular situation?* Once we have a sense of what might
be a good approach, we put it into practice, try it out, and then
evaluate the results.

This all points to an ongoing, evolving relationship between the
workings of our practice and the workings of our minds. It takes time to
discover skillful ways of engaging with that relationship; it's a
learning process. But by sticking with this process, by taking a genuine
interest in it, we can develop a good sense of what practices---whether
from teachers or our own innovations---are truly beneficial, what
practices accord with Dhamma, what practices genuinely work for us.

# The Generosity of Respect

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-05-05

When we are working together and interacting with each other, it's
important for each of us in the community to have mutual respect for one
another and to recognize that everybody is here because they have the
intention to do something good, something wholesome. On the level of
personality, it's easy to exercise our critical faculties---we're pretty
adept at that. Especially when we live together over long periods of
time, we get to know each others' quirks rather intimately. It doesn't
take much intelligence or wisdom to pick up on somebody's quirks. It
takes significantly more wisdom to attend to our own wholesome
intentions and to honor and respect the wholesome intentions of other
people. This doesn't mean that suddenly people are no longer irritating.
But it does mean that we have a lot more space to deal with and support
each other because we sense the opportunity for generosity---being
generous by offering each other a sense of respect. We usually think of
generosity in material terms, but it also means giving each other
respect, space, encouragement, and support for our spiritual endeavors.
That is a significant act of generosity that helps to transform the
heart.

# Breathing into Busy Activity

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-04-05

There has been a lot of busyness here these days. Many things need to be
done, and we're doing them. But it's important to be careful about how
much we get swept up into the busyness of our lives. Those are two
different things–the doing of a task and the frantic, busy, scattered
energy we may bring to the task. We can try to watch and reflect on the
feeling behind what we're doing. What is the energy behind it? Recognize
where the feeling of agitation comes from.

Much depends upon staying with the breathing–breathing into the activity
of what we're doing. Sometimes it helps to step back, relax, and slow
down. That doesn't mean we accomplish less. Oftentimes, the more frantic
we become, the less we accomplish. In addition, being frantic obstructs
the enjoyment of what we're doing and may compromise our harmony with
others. So pay attention to breathing and relaxing.

We also need to be careful not to take on too many things at once.
However, it's more the attitude we carry in our mind that's the problem,
because we can really only do one thing at a time. We carry around in
our minds all the things we think we have to do, and that stirs up this
frantic energy.

We deal with this by breathing into what we are doing, being with it,
and not getting too swept up. Make the breath a force for settling. It
can be very satisfying paying attention to the breath, the body, and the
actions involved in the task we're doing. The more we attend to the body
while we are engaged, the more we can generate a sense of focus and
wellbeing in the midst of activity.

# A Mango Tree Was My Teacher

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-19-13

As we practice, one of the qualities that we need to cultivate or attend
to is learning how to pay attention to our circumstances, what is
happening around us. So often we wait for instruction, or the right
circumstances, or a sign that we are doing the right thing. For us to
really take advantage of the practice, we need to learn from our
circumstances and pay attention to the natural processes around us.

There's a story that Ajahn Chah used to use in his teachings. It is a
Jataka tale about a king who takes his retinue off to do some business.
As they pass by an area in the forest, the king sees a wild mango tree
full of mangoes and thinks to himself, *Those mangoes look really good.
At the end of the day when we're going back to the palace, I'm going to
stop by this tree and have some of those mangoes. That will be really
refreshing.* Then he moves on. However, the people toward the back of
the retinue have a different idea, and they start to bash the tree and
shake the tree, knocking the branches down, taking the fallen fruit for
themselves.

Evening comes and the king returns to the same spot. There, before him,
is this poor, bashed up, barren tree where he believed all of the
mangoes would be hanging. He is disappointed and thinks to himself,
*This is really sad. This big tree's been beaten up and abused.* He
looks around and sees another mango tree that is not very full and does
not have many mangoes on it. Reflecting to himself he thinks, *That tree
seems to be the same as it was before. There is a real problem with
having a full tree---and it's the same with my life: I have many duties,
responsibilities, and many people around me. Maybe I should transform my
life to be more like this scrawny mango tree and step out of my duties
and responsibilities.* That was his impetus to go forth on the spiritual
path to become a religious seeker. In the future, whenever he was asked
who his teacher was, he would respond: "A mango tree was my teacher."

So when we consider the circumstances, the events, and the natural
processes around us, we see that truth is being displayed all the time.
The problem is that we don't pay attention, or if we do pay attention,
it is not in a way that is reflective---we don't internalize or consider
the true meaning. When this happens we don't derive the benefit of the
experience; instead, we wait for some kind of overt teaching or
instruction. With wise reflection, we learn how to internalize the
teachings by observing the events and circumstances around us.

# A Bowl Full of Light

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 08-28-13

I have been reading a book on Hawaiian spirituality, and there's a
beautiful image that Hawaiians use: Each one of us is born into the
world with a bowl full of light; and for each unskillful choice we make
throughout our lives---getting caught up in anger, conflict, or
selfishness---it's as if we put a rock in the bowl. The more rocks that
are placed in the bowl, the less room there is for light.

In our daily-life practice, by examining what it is we are doing, we can
reflect on whether we are a being of light or a being of rocks and
pebbles. When we recognize that we have accumulated any kind of rocks or
pebbles, we learn how to tip over the bowl and dump the rocks out. This
helps us look after that bowl of light and return to making choices that
are more skillful.

Light is a universal image that is used across all religious and
spiritual traditions. In the first discourse of the Buddha, the
Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta, there is the contemplation of the Four
Noble Truths and the implementing of the Eightfold Path. The stock
phrases that follow this are: *cakkhuṁ udapādi, ñāṇaṁ udapādi, paññā
udapādi, vijjā udapādi, āloko udapādi:* Vision arises, knowledge arises,
wisdom arises, clear seeing arises, and light arises. There is a sense
of light coming into being. From the Buddhist perspective, when we
establish and develop a continuity of training with the Four Noble
Truths and the Eightfold Path, it brings light into the mind and into
our being.

# An Internal Space of Mindfulness

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-07-12

Currently, there are many visiting monastics and laypeople here, and the
numbers are at the high-end of what we are used to. In some areas of the
monastery there is limited space and close quarters. So in the monk's
room, the kitchen, and various other places where we are doing
activities together we need to attend to the ways we interact with each
other. It is easy to slip into frivolous, sarcastic, or negative speech
that doesn't help us or anyone around us. So when in proximity with
people, try to maintain a mindful and respectful space. If we're not
attentive to that, and barge into crowded places being pushy or anxious,
it tends to have an agitating influence and is not particularly pleasant
for anyone. So let's try to return to an inner space of mindfulness.

How do we maintain mindfulness? All of us living at the monastery are
here because we are interested and inspired by the concepts of
mindfulness and wisdom. But sometimes when we find ourselves situations
where we are more socially active and engaged than usual, mindfulness
and wisdom fall by the wayside, and the result is not beautiful. So
instead, we can pay special attention to maintaining mindfulness.

It's not that difficult to be mindful when we are on our own in our
*kuṭis*. But when we're engaging with others, when there are duties that
need to be done, or when something needs doing right away, it takes
effort to stop ourselves from being swept up in agitation and effort to
maintain a space of mindfulness and letting go. What we are letting go
of is suffering. When we use mindfulness and relinquishment, there's
less suffering. With less mindfulness and less relinquishment, there is
more suffering. It's a very simple equation, but one we can easily
forget.

# To See the True Nature of Things

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 12-24-04

Without clearly understanding the processes of our minds, we create all
kinds of problems. We are dragged about by emotional states. For there
to be personal and global peace, these states need to be understood. The
ways of the mind need to be seen clearly. This is the function and value
of Dhamma.

When we are feeling enthusiastic, we can easily give ourselves to the
practice. But it can also happen that, at times, we feel completely
disillusioned, even to the extent that we forget the original confidence
and faith we had. But that is natural. It is like swimming a long way.
We become tired. There's no need to panic though; we can simply be still
for a while. Then, when we have regained strength, we continue. When we
understand in accordance with nature, we understand these states will
change. Despair, if that is what has arisen, will pass. We keep
practicing. By observing our minds and seeing how our attitudes are
continually changing we more clearly understand that impermanence is
natural.

Isn't cultivating Dhamma as important as breathing? If we stop
breathing, then we die. If we are not established in a right
understanding of the truth---of the way things are---then also we die.
We lose touch with what is truly good. If we are lacking the richness of
truth in our hearts, then when we die and they cremate us, our lives
will be worth no more than the handful of ashes we produce---and that's
not much! We must investigate how to live in a way that truly accords
with what the Buddha taught. Then we can live in harmony without
conflicts, difficulties, and problems.\
*Sīla*, morality, is that which shows us the Buddha's middle way. It
points to the avoidance of the extremes of pleasure and pain; it means
knowing the right amount. When we live in the middle way regarding
actions of body and speech, then we don't cause offense to others; we do
what is appropriate for human beings. The practice of formal meditation
is to train our minds and hearts to stay in the middle way.

Many people who meditate try to force their minds to be as they want
them to be. They sit there arguing with their thoughts. If their
attention wanders, they forcibly bring it back to the breath. Too much
forcing is not the middle way. The middle way is the ease that arises
naturally in the mind when there is right effort, right intention, and
right awareness. When the practice is right and there is ease of mind,
we can simply watch the different states that arise and consider their
nature. We don't need to argue with anything. Arguing only causes
restlessness. Whatever emotion arises is within the domain of our
awareness, and we simply watch. Whether it's joyful or the absolute
opposite, each experience is within the boundaries of our awareness. We
just sit, watch, recognize, and contemplate them all. They will
naturally cease. Why do they cease? Because that is their nature. It is
this realization of the true nature of change that strengthens and
stills the mind. With such insight there is tranquility and peace.

What we call "me" is merely a convention. We are born without names.
Then somebody gives us a name and after being called this name for a
while, we start to think that a thing called "me and mine" actually
exists. Then we feel we have to spend our lives looking after it. The
wisdom of the Buddha knows how to let go of this "me," this "self," and
all that pertains to it---possessions, attitudes, views, and opinions.
This means letting go of the conditions that make suffering arise, and
that requires taking the opportunity to see the true nature of things.

# Faith Develops Energy and Wisdom

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-30-12

Faith is an essential part of our practice, and it's not something that
magically appears on its own. Rather, the arising of faith takes effort.
We need to direct our attention toward it, to frequently reflect on the
arising of faith as a real possibility for us.

As Westerners, most of us are not on familiar ground when we reflect on
faith. But it is an important quality for balancing the different
aspects of our practice. In particular, faith comes first among the Five
Spiritual Powers. It is used to balance wisdom---the fifth Power---and
to support energy and effort---the second Power. How does that work?
Wisdom arises from investigative analysis, and, without faith,
investigative analysis becomes dry and we tend to lose energy. The
qualities of faith include confidence and devotion, both of which
naturally result in increased energy and effort. Energy and effort need
to be nourished, and faith is an important part of that nourishment.

The opposite is true as well: When the wisdom faculty is lacking in
faith, it often leads to cleverness and a superficially critical way of
evaluating things. And without faith, wisdom can increase our
negativity, which in turn can reduce our own energy and the energy of
the people with whom we engage.

For many reasons, it is important to turn our attention toward faith, to
reflect on it, so we can recognize faith as an essential part of our
practice.

# Comfortable in Any Circumstance

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-04-13

It looks like it's going to be hot again today. Most of us are
uncomfortable when it's hot like this. So what we need to do, as Dhamma
practitioners, is learn how to adapt. We learn to dwell with mindfulness
and equanimity whether things are to our liking or not. The tendency is
to wait for conditions we like, and, when they arise, only then do we
say to ourselves, *Okay, now I can practice.* It's an attitude that can
easily become habitual. But being tied to the human condition as we are,
it's rare for things to be just right. So what we need to do is develop
a willingness to work with conditions as they are. If it's really hot,
then we adjust our pace accordingly; perhaps we slow down what we're
doing. We may say to ourselves, *Really, truly, I can't practice now. I
have to wait for this to be over and then I can practice.*That's a
common response, but we shouldn't waste our time with it.

Often we deal with imperfect conditions by getting in touch with our
"inner complainer" that's whining away, going on and on about how
miserable we feel. Instead of mindlessly doing that, we can use
challenging circumstances as a means of investigating the habit of
complaining. We do this by watching the mind trying to convince itself
that physical discomfort automatically means we have to experience
mental discomfort. When the mind is adopting that sort of
misunderstanding and complaining about the circumstances, we observe how
this simply perpetuates suffering. It's not that we're trying to sugar
coat the tendency to complain by saying to ourselves, *Oh, isn't this
wonderful? I just love it when it's 108 degrees outside.* Instead we're
facing reality and being honest with ourselves. At the same time, we
understand that simply because circumstances are less than ideal, they
do not also have to be a source of complication or oppression.

The point is to distinguish between the direct, physical experience and
the layers of mental complication we add to that experience. When we do
that, it gives us an inner refuge, allowing us to be comfortable in any
circumstance. That's one of the magical things about Dhamma practice. We
can be at ease and clear in any circumstance if we're willing to direct
our attention in a skillful way.

# Putting Our Moods in Their Place

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-17-13

I've been thinking about Ajahn Ñanadhammo, recalling his most memorable
interaction with Ajahn Chah while living at Wat Pah Pong.

One day while out on alms round, Ajahn Ñanadhammo had a slight argument
with another monk and became stirred up and upset. When he returned to
the monastery, Ajahn Chah smiled at him and said very sweetly in
English, "Good morning." Of course Ajahn Ñanadhammo was really tickled
with that, and this feeling of happiness arose that was uplifting for
him.

In the late afternoon, he went over to Ajahn Chah's dwelling place.
Oftentimes monks would go over there in the afternoon when laypeople
came by to pay respects and ask questions; it was a good opportunity to
hear Ajahn Chah give advice. As evening approached, Ajahn Chah sent
everybody off to *pūjā*, except for Ajahn Ñanadhammo, who alone was
asked to stay. He sat beneath Luang Por Chah, massaging his feet. In the
distance he could hear the chanting of evening pūjā, with the stillness
of the forest almost palpable. Ajahn Ñanadhammo described it as an
ethereal, heavenly experience, and he felt quite blissful.

Suddenly, Ajahn Chah pulled his foot away and kicked Ajahn Ñanadhammo in
the chest, sending him flat on his back. This was quite a shock, of
course. Then Ajahn Chah said, "You're not really paying attention to the
practice or the training. You have an argument in the morning and get
upset, carrying around a mood of ill will. Then all it takes is one
person to say good morning to you, and you go off into a happy mood,
spending the day proliferating about that. You come over here and even
more happens that pleases you, so you get into an even happier mood.
Next I put you flat on your back, and you're confused. That's not the
mind of a practitioner, that's not the mind of somebody who is training
in Dhamma. You have to be able to stop yourself from following your
moods. You do your best not to be caught by them, believe in them, or
buy into them. That's what defines a practitioner."

For all of us, moods are woven into the fabric of our lives. We go up
and down, get inspired and depressed, energetic or enervated by our
moods. None of that is the essence of practice. To really practice is to
see through these conditions, to see them clearly, as they really are:
*This is just a mood. This happens to be something I like. This happens
to be something I dislike.* It doesn't mean we don't have feelings, but
we resist picking them up and running with them all the time.

As we go about our day, we need to look at the nature of our
impressions---to look at the contact, the feelings, and the way moods
want us to go---and stop ourselves from giving in to them. We have to be
willing to look closely at moods and challenge them. With peaceful
moods, for instance, if we get what we want and things go the way we
prefer, that's not very stable, that's no refuge at all. The refuge is
in *sati-paññā*---mindfulness and wisdom*.* We use sati-paññā to
cultivate truth-discerning awareness at all times. We know our moods, we
know their arising and their fading away. Whether they are pleasant or
unpleasant, we don't get caught by them nor do we follow them, we learn
to relinquish this tendency of mind.

# Choosing the Pāramīs

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-11-13

Several nights ago I gave a talk on the ten *pāramīs*, qualities that
are helpful for cultivation and development: generosity, virtue,
renunciation, wisdom, effort, truthfulness, resolution, loving-kindness,
patience, and equanimity. Each is helpful to bring up as an alternative
to a particular difficult or obstructive state present in the mind.

As a preliminary step, we can ask ourselves questions that pertain to
these pāramīs in a general way. For example, *How do I want to orient
myself and my practice? What principles of training do I feel need
attending to?* When we think in terms of the pāramīs, the underlying
connecting thread is making a commitment to or leaning toward what is
wholesome and skillful, uplifting and brightening. We don't need to put
a name on it or have a label for it. We can orient ourselves with these
fundamental principles of wholesomeness and skillfulness and encourage
ourselves toward these brightening qualities of mind. In a very
elemental way, the function of these principles of goodness is to
alleviate a tendency towards suffering.

When we're engaged in work or duties or have to deal with different
personalities in our living situations, we have an opportunity to bring
to mind these principles of training and to incline ourselves toward
that which is wholesome and skillful. It's so easy to rationalize
negativity, aversion, frustration, and a sense of, *Oh, woe is me*, and
really miss the point that we always have an option to choose. We can
make an effort to keep exercising that option of choosing and inclining
ourselves toward those principles of goodness. And the pāramīs are ways
of articulating those principles as specific qualities we can develop.
We can also recognize the underlying impulse to opt for these principles
of goodness, of wholesomeness, rather than resigning ourselves to
attitudes of negativity and the things that thwart our spiritual
aspirations. These are moment-to-moment choices, moment-to-moment
opportunities for establishing a particular direction for our minds and
our hearts. Ultimately, this direction will help us choose the pāramīs
rather than something else.

# Challenging Our Perceptions of Work

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-06-13

It's helpful to consider and reflect on how we perceive work. If we
bring up the word "work," what comes to mind? There may be a feeling of
drudgery, that it's onerous, maybe even odious. We often view work as
something we're beset with, something we have to get done and out of the
way before we can be comfortable and at ease. Or we may think of work as
something that keeps us from our meditation practice. These are merely
perceptions that come up in the mind, and it's helpful to challenge
them.

If we do challenge them, we can learn to bring mindfulness into the work
period, which helps us develop a continuity of attention and reflective
clarity. When we approach the work period like this, we realize it isn't
something to get out of the way, but rather, it's an important aspect of
the training. We don't want to be like so many people who live their
whole lives waiting for the work to be over: *When I get this done, I'll
be happy and I can relax.* ... And as death approaches, they're still
waiting.

It's also helpful to remember that the work we do in the monastery
serves to maintain the facilities here; we're looking after the places
we live in, for our own benefit and for the benefit of others. When we
perceive our work in this way, we can recognize that it's an opportunity
for giving, for generosity, and for putting forth effort that benefits
everyone. And we're reminded that generosity is not limited to material
things, but includes acts of service, wholesome, skillful, and selfless
actions. As a result, our work can become a source of wellbeing and
happiness.

In Thai, the word for work also means festival. This blurs the
distinction between work and enjoyment. During my time in Thailand, I
was always struck by the northeastern villagers who came to the
monastery to work. They really enjoyed themselves. They saw this work as
an opportunity to do good things together. We can take a page from their
book and use our work as an opportunity to develop a sense of lightness,
to enjoy pitching in together and enjoy doing what is beneficial.

# Nothing Bad Has Ever Happened to Me

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 11-15-12

Gratitude is an important quality to bring to mind, because it's easy
for the mind to focus on faults, flaws, difficulties, and obstructions.
Whether it's external or internal---the things around us, or our own
particular difficulties---it's easy to obsess on the negative. When we
cultivate and bring to mind a sense of gratitude, it helps the mind
direct attention to what is wholesome, skillful, and positive. It's not
a small thing, because the mind requires a reserve and foundation of
well-being, and gratitude is a very direct way of being able to
establish that. We don't need to have everything go our way or get what
we want in order to be grateful; the fact that we're alive, breathing
and conscious is a lot to be grateful for already.

Last night, one of the people at Yoga Mendocino mentioned the Jewish
concept of a *Tzadik*–a person who is an adept or a well-developed
person. One characteristic of Tzadiks is that they have a sense of
gratitude. In the Jewish tradition, this would be gratitude to God. This
reminded me of an Eastern European Jewish story where a Rabbi went to
visit another highly respected elder Rabbi in the Ukrainian Hasidic
tradition. The visiting Rabbi says to the elder Rabbi, "In the Talmud it
says we should be grateful and praise the Lord even for the evil that
happens, let alone what is good. How are we supposed to understand
that?" And the elder Rabbi replies, "Go to my student, Zusha, over in
the House of Study and ask him." So the visiting Rabbi walks over to the
House of Study and finds Zusha there, emaciated, filthy and clothed in
rags. He asks, "Zusha, how are we supposed to understand the saying from
the Talmud that we should be grateful and praise the Lord even for what
is evil let alone for what is good?" And Zusha answers, "I can't tell
you. I don't really know. Nothing bad has ever happened to me."

When we are established in the quality of gratitude, it buoys us up
through everything. There are many logical reasons why we could feel
that something is awful or not up to our standard. But from a different
perspective, we have the life faculty and the opportunity to come in
contact with wholesome experiences. We can make a choice with what is
good and what is bad, what is conducive to happiness and wellbeing, and
what is conducive to making the choices that lead to those wholesome
qualities. That's something to be incredibly grateful for. And we can
generate that gratitude by paying attention to the inclination of our
minds, by recognizing what our minds are doing and when we have lost
this sense of appreciation. In seemingly difficult and trying
circumstances, we can encourage those qualities of gratitude that allow
us to understand, just as Zusha suggests, that generally speaking,
*Nothing bad has ever happened to me*.

# The Natural Result

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-09-12

This morning we chanted the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta in English.
There's always something that strikes me in that sutta, both hearing it
and reflecting on it. For instance, the Buddha says the Middle Way and
the Eightfold Path give knowledge and understanding and lead to peace
and awakening. That's the function of the path. When we are aligned with
the Middle Way, we are in balance---this happens naturally.

In *Pāḷi*, the word *karaṇī,*as in *cakkhukaraṇī,* *ñāṇakaraṇī*, means
"to make" or "to produce." It's an emphatic verb. This suggests that
when we put our practice into balance, a good result will be produced.
It's helpful to develop a sense of confidence in this natural
cause-and-effect relationship.

How do we achieve this balance? Again, we align ourselves with the
Middle Way, which means not getting caught by the extremes of either
sensual indulgence or ascetic deprivation; not seeking delight---always
looking for something to gratify ourselves---and not pushing things
away, trying to get rid of them.

Ajahn Chah used to say that there are basically two desires in the mind:
one is the desire to get something, which has the energy of moving
toward; the other is the desire to get rid something, not wanting to
deal with it, which has the energy of pushing away. We see these two
desires at work all the time---as we perform our tasks and duties, while
engaging with people, and when we're off on our own. The mind tends to
lean toward these two desires. It's not in balance; it's not following
the Middle Way. But when we come back to a place of being attentive to
balance, attentive to the Middle Way, bringing forth the factors of the
path, then the natural results are knowledge and understanding and a
sense of peace.

As we go about our daily chores, our day-to-day living in the monastery,
we can make this simple effort of looking after the path, looking after
those aspects of training the Buddha laid down for us. When we do this,
we will produce the natural results of the Middle Way.

# Work Is Giving

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-10-05

Since today is a community work day, there is an opportunity to work
together for the benefit of the monastery and to recognize how we look
at opportunities for work. Sometimes we may feel that the word *work*
already has the connotation of drudgery, a burden in some way. But
that's merely how we perceive it and therefore create a certain feeling
around it. Instead, we can change our perceptions and see work as an
opportunity for giving---giving that benefits others or, rather, giving
that benefits somebody other than ourselves. These are opportunities to
do something quite noble.

We can also look at work in terms of something that is enjoyable. In the
English language, the word *work* doesn't have the connotation of being
enjoyable. However, in Thai, the same word that one uses for *work* is
also used to mean festival. If it's a festival, it's an opportunity to
get together and have a good time. This creates a completely different
perception than drudgery. It is interesting seeing how many connotations
we bring to words. Certainly it's the perception we have of work and
what we bring to it that gives us the opportunity to put our intention
on generosity, sharing, participating, and helping. These intentions
brighten the mind and help us enjoy ourselves at the same time.

# An Opportunity to Develop Mindfulness

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-14-12

The Buddha spoke about the different postures for meditation–walking,
sitting, standing and lying down–basically, every position of the body.
He also spoke about the "foundations of mindfulness," that is, the body,
feelings, the mind, and objects of mind. These are all supports we can
use to develop attention. So we have the opportunity to cultivate
mindfulness and attention with everything we do. Specifically, we can
use work and engagement in activity as a way to help with that
cultivation.

As we develop mindfulness around our work chores, we can see that the
functions and benefits of mindfulness are more than merely internal. For
example, mindfulness enhances our ability to act more appropriately when
in proximity with others who are also working. If we are painting next
to somebody standing on a ladder, how do we maintain mindfulness so we
don't knock them over? How do we engage in a conversation while wielding
a paintbrush without splattering the person next to us? This sounds
basic, but I've seen "mindful meditators" get into all sorts of trouble.

We can cultivate attention and mindfulness by anchoring our work
meditation in the body. One way to do this is to ask ourselves, *How am
I feeling? Am I relaxed and grounded? Am I in contact with things around
me? Am I in contact with attention and awareness?*

In terms of other people nearby, we want to stay mindful of the need we
all have for personal space. It takes a certain degree of empathy to
understand that other people have their own comfort zones and to
mindfully account for that. And while not wanting to be encroached upon,
most people also have a wish to be recognized. This gives us a purpose
and an opportunity to extend kind attention when relating to each other
through our actions and speech. During the work periods, we can offer
each other support and respect as human beings. That's how we engender
loving-kindness and one of the many ways we cultivate mindfulness.

It is important to recognize the practical applications of mindfulness
and how mindfulness affects our attitudes and perspectives, both in how
we relate to others and to the world around us. From something very
simple like being mindful of one breath at a time, one step at a time,
we can start to develop a foundation in clarity and learning, which
brings much benefit into our lives.

# Applying Effort Before Death

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-31-05

One of the American monks in Thailand, Tan Pannyavudo, has just died. He
had been spending the Rains Retreat at Ajahn Dun's monastery. Yesterday
morning, he didn't show up for alms round. A monk was sent to check on
him, and he was found lifeless in the bathroom. It looked like he
fainted while standing up, fell, and hit his head on the way down.

We remind ourselves of these concepts: *I am of the nature to age, I
have not gone beyond aging; I am of the nature to sicken, I have not
gone beyond sickness; I am of the nature to die, I have not gone beyond
dying.* We may think these concepts apply to sometime in the
future---somewhere else, not now---but that is not the case. We carry
old age, sickness, and death with us all the time. Something that is
very mundane and we do all the time, such as getting up at night to go
to the toilet---well, tonight may be the last time for us to do that.
It's always important to recollect and remember that, making sure we are
using our time skillfully.\
Tan Pannyavudo was a very diligent and sincere monk. He had a career
track waiting for him in the world but chose not to take it. Instead, he
became a monk, used his time skillfully, and put effort into his
spiritual life.

However long we have to live, it is so important to put effort into that
which is skillful, directing our effort toward the deathless. This can
have an extraordinary benefit, not only for us, but for everyone else.
The effort we put into disentangling ourselves from *saṁsāra*---cyclical
rebirth---is of immense benefit. Saṁsāra keeps weaving its entangling
web because of the inappropriate effort we make buying into it. However,
by looking at the realities of the human condition, we can apply
appropriate effort to free ourselves from saṁsāra, and do that which is
of the most benefit for our lives.

# A Sense of Self

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-23-11

Student: I'm trying to overcome a sense of self, but my spiritual quest
seems to revolve around me trying to attain something. The thought of
dropping my self seems like a snake swallowing its tail.

Luang Por Pasanno: That's the way it is in the beginning. It's a process
of feeling it out. You have to play with it and work it out over time,
as you get better and better at it. It's important in the beginning to
be in the right container and have good spiritual friends. These serve
as supports. In the beginning you flail around a lot, but it's not in
vain.

S: Before the first stage of awakening, the stream-entry experience, are
there places where a practitioner can experience the dropping away of
the sense of self?

LPP: Sure: wherever it arises! Just like any other conditioned
phenomenon, the sense of self arises and passes away. It's simply that
we're so focused on the next thing that we don't notice the cessation.

S: During the stream-entry experience, are the three lower
fetters---personality view, attachment to rights and practices, and
skeptical doubt---all dropped at once, or in stages?

LPP: All at once.

S: Do the results of *kamma* speed up when you are practicing?

LPP: Not necessarily. Kamma has its own way of playing itself out.
There's a saying that kamma is going to do what kamma is going to do.

S: The Buddha said that kamma can't be understood by a normal mind. Are
there practitioners who have good enough concentration that they can
understand parts of it?

LPP: Oh, sure. There are meditators in Thailand with good concentration
who can see parts of it. But only the Buddha could understand it
completely.

# Developing Samaṇa Saññā

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-19-05

Yesterday, at the City of the Dharma Realm in Sacramento, I was giving
instructions to twenty-eight *shramaneris* who were preparing to ordain
as *bhikshunis* next month. It was quite a delightful time. Their
sincerity was tangible.

One of the ideas I brought up with them is developing *samaṇa sañña,*
the perception or recollection of being a religious seeker. We function
out of our perceptions. We perceive something to be interesting or
desirable, and we get excited. We perceive something to be worrisome or
troublesome, and we start to have aversion or negativity. Perceptions
are always informing how we relate to things. The Buddha encouraged us
to develop the perception or recollection of being religious seekers. In
that way, we can relate to the circumstances in which we find ourselves,
and to the people with whom we live from a very different perspective.
By perceiving ourselves to be religious seekers---those who are seeking
peace---we encourage ourselves to always relate and act in the best
possible manner.

So how do we conduct ourselves? What do we do as seekers? How do we
engage in our responsibilities and duties in order to maintain a quality
of peace? How do we fulfill that aspiration? We do this by reminding
ourselves and recollecting, *Yes, this is what I am, this is what I'm
doing and most valuable for me to be doing---seeking peace, seeking
truth*.

As we take on duties or have contact and engagement with each other, we
can relate to each other as fellow seekers of truth and peace, rather
than as objects of aversion, attention, or interest, or just somebody
else who can fulfill a function. There are times when we may think,
*There's the person who does the computer work. There's the person who
is the kitchen manager. There's the person who does this or that*. We
might see that person only in a particular role or having a certain type
of personality. This really limits us and limits everybody else as well.

Instead, we can recollect ourselves as samaṇas and develop a perception
of each other as fellow seekers of peace, fellow seekers of truth. This
helps us support our own practice, our own daily living in a way that is
peaceful and encourages us to live skillful lives in the monastery.

# Reframing an Opportunity to Give

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 10-20-12

In one discourse, the Buddha speaks about the "great gifts" we give to
countless beings by keeping the precepts. Through diligence in virtue,
using the precepts to guide our conduct, we offer security to other
beings---freedom from danger, fear, and animosity. These are great
gifts, indeed.

Similarly, in terms of our daily lives in the monastery, it's helpful to
reframe what we do and how we approach life so that we look at our
activities as opportunities to give gifts of service. We can give a gift
of service by doing a task that needs to be done instead of waiting for
somebody else to do it. Rather than attending the morning *pūjās* and
group practices because we feel they are being imposed from the outside,
we can take our attendance as an opportunity to give a gift to the
community by supporting and encouraging each other in practice. There
can be a completely different relationship with how we deal with our
schedules if we are willing to view them in this way. Rather than
considering our duties and chores as onerous tasks we have to put up
with, we can relate to them as an opportunity to give a gift that
sustains the monastery and the supportive community we live in together.

We mustn't relate to the practice like wage laborers. If we think of
ourselves as working stiffs trudging through the practice to get our
paycheck at the end of the week, then there's not much joy or wisdom
arising from what we are doing. But when we relate to the practice as a
series of opportunities to give what's beneficial to others, then it is
in all respects a different matter, it has a completely different feel.
And of course, as with any gift, the first beneficiary is ourselves.
When we relate to the training and the life we are leading in terms of
giving, it uplifts our hearts.

# Priming the Mind

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 11-26-12

As we get into the cool season, there are things around the monastery
that need to be taken care of and chores that need to be finished before
the winter retreat begins. It's a good time to be paying attention to
all that, as well as trying to keep things fairly quiet.

Last week, during the Thanksgiving Retreat, I didn't really have a plan
in mind for what I was going to teach. I ended up talking a lot about
*anicca*, *dukkha* and *anattā*, and how these three characteristics
display themselves in our practice and how central they are to our
practice. We constantly use reflections of impermanence,
unsatisfactoriness, and not-self when investigating our experience. This
is not a contemplation we only do on retreat or during a time of formal
meditation; it's an investigative perspective that we bring to all of
our experience, both in formal practice, as well as in the day-to-day
application of our mindfulness and contemplative living.

It is quite essential in the practice to bring that investigation into
the mind, so that the mind is seeded or primed. Last night at teatime we
were talking about a video used to demonstrate a psychological
phenomenon: It shows a circle of people people passing two basketballs
around. Some people in the group are wearing black and the others are
wearing white. One ball is being passed between the players wearing
black and the other ball is being passed between the players wearing
white. The people viewing the video are told to keep track of the number
of times the ball gets passed between the players wearing white. As a
result, viewers focus on the players in white shirts and the ball to the
exclusion of most everything else. So when somebody in the video dressed
in a gorilla suit walks through the group of people throwing the
basketballs, beats his chest, and walks off, most people don't even
notice!

That's because the mind was primed to focus in a particular way---a way
that produced an overall state of heedlessness. But if we prime the mind
to view experience in terms of anicca, dukkha, and anattā*,* in terms of
these universal characteristics, then we start to see those
characteristics more consistently and clearly. However, we tend to
overlook those fundamental truths of existence, thereby missing the big
picture. We get caught up in our personal stories, worries, fears,
likes, and dislikes. So we need to prime the mind for viewing our
experience through the lens of Dhamma, because otherwise we overlook it.
That's very much a part of our training in mindfulness, reflection, and
investigation: keeping a particular agenda in mind.

Of course, the agenda here is to see how the Buddha's fundamental truths
actually apply to our experience, how those truths affect us. The
beneficial effects of seeing these truths are clarity, relinquishment,
and loosening the grip of clinging and delusion. By priming the mind to
see though the lens of Dhamma we are supporting wholesome inclinations
toward spiritual truth and spiritual peace, rather than unwholesome
inclinations that spur the mind into keeping us clouded in delusion.

# Carrying it Around

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-28-12

We've had visitors from Thailand in the past four weeks, and I think
it's important to have this kind of contact and connection with elder
monks in our tradition. During this time, there's been a fair amount of
coming and going, which has been conducive to a lot of busyness. So now
we can allow the monastery to settle into a bit more simplicity---the
simple rhythm of our daily duties, chores and practices. We'll take the
next bit of time to practice on our own in the evenings, giving each
other the opportunity for a bit more space and solitude.

Sometimes we have space, but we just fill it up, distracting ourselves
with socializing and chatting. This is a good time to get back to our
*kuṭis* and keep that theme of simplicity going. We can sit in our kuṭis
by ourselves, proliferating about all sorts of things, and miss that
opportunity for inner simplicity. Alternatively, we can attend to the
simplicity of watching the breath or doing walking meditation at our
kuṭis and learn how to delight in that.

When the Buddha taught his Aunt Mahāpajāpatī about the Dhamma in brief,
he emphasized non-proliferation or non-complexity as a characteristic
that aligns itself with *Dhamma-Vinaya,*the teachings and the
discipline. We can add our complications and complexities to everything
around us and forget that this training, this practice, in and of
itself---if we attend to it and maintain our focus---is a natural
shedding of complication and complexity.

We have a habit of carrying around all sorts of proliferations and
complications. Because we believe in them, we invest in them. Just think
of all that complexity, all the planning, worrying about, and going into
trepidation about some external event that's going to happen, or not
going to happen, and carrying around in our minds all the people in our
social environment: *Oh, this person said that and that person said
this,* on and on. When we're caught up in that sort of thing, it's time
to ask ourselves: *Is this really necessary? What's the point?* *If the
Dhamma-Vinaya of the Buddha is for non-proliferation and
non-complication, then why do I insist on carrying all that around? How
do I put it down? How do I return to the principles of Dhamma-Vinaya and
continue with the training?*

Part of the answer is to give ourselves the time and space to practice
at our dwelling places in the forest. Obviously, we still need to
exercise skill when coming into contact with other people. But
*kāyaviveka*---physical solitude---helps develop the heart and mind.
That's what we're here for, so let's focus on that.

# The Spider in Its Web

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 10-26-13

When the mind seeks objects for sense contact, it almost always finds
the objects it seeks. When it seeks objects of stimulation, interest,
gratification, aversion, or irritation, it can easily find them, because
there's always something around to be excited or irritated about. That's
why the quality of sense restraint is so important. We exercise this
quality by paying close attention to the process of sense contact, and
by learning to experience that contact---sights, sounds, smells, tastes,
touch, and mental objects---without getting hooked into the desire and
aversion, the liking and disliking, that tends to happen when sense
restraint is absent.

Ajahn Chah used the image of a spider sitting in the center of its web,
alert and waiting. As soon as an insect touches the web, the spider goes
out, grabs the insect, wraps it up, and brings it back to the web's
center for eating. In a similar way, we have a web made from our senses,
and at its center is our heart and our ability to be aware. When this
web is touched by some form of contact, we can draw that into the heart
and---exercising sense restraint---we can reflect, investigate, and deal
with that contact skillfully, according to Dhamma, without getting swept
up in reaction and proliferation. When we take this quality of sense
restraint as our center, we carry it into our daily lives of social
interaction, duties and chores, and into formal meditation as well.

During the morning work period and at mealtime, if we let the mind get
swept up into reactions and proliferations arising from social contact,
when we go back to our dwellings in the afternoon, the mind will be
chewing on it for perhaps hours, so that meditation becomes problematic.
But if we are well established in sense restraint during such times of
social contact, afterward, the mind will be steady and stable---it will
be in a state much more conducive to having a fruitful meditation. As we
endeavor to establish continuity in our practice, we recognize sense
restraint as a key aspect of that. Establishing a continuity of sense
restraint ensures that the food in our web will be nourishing.

# An Internal Articulation of Dhamma

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-30-12

I've been noticing something in my speech that I find irritating. It's
my use of filler words such as "like," "sort of," "um." I think to
myself, *Am I getting more and more inarticulate and hopeless with age?*
Then I listen to other people, and it's pretty much the same. To break
that habit, we can learn to internally compose what we want to say
before we speak, rather than fumbling around with "um," "ah," "sort of,"
"like," "er."

Even worse is the tendency to use speech that is imprecise. This is
particularly problematic when it comes to speaking about the Dhamma.
Being imprecise about the Dhamma does not benefit the Dhamma. The Dhamma
itself is extremely clear, and we should reflect that clarity in our
speech. Again, one way to do that is by focusing internally on what
we're about to say before we say it. Not only will this help us compose
our thoughts so they are clear, it will also help us to uncover any
defects that exist in our understanding.

We can encourage ourselves or even encourage each other---if people are
open to it---to highlight our speech patterns as a tool for clarifying
our own thoughts and for seeing how we express and communicate our ideas
to others. The benefit is that internal clarity arises as well as the
internal articulation of Dhamma.

# Stopping

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-08-05

The other night Ajahn Sucitto gave a Dhamma talk about the type of
*kamma* that leads to the end of kamma. And one type of kamma he spoke
about was *stopping*. The importance of stopping is often overlooked. We
get so caught up in doing, becoming, activity, and engagement that we
don't attend to stopping---it's a neglected aspect of our practice. This
isn't about sitting around doing nothing, because that's a form of doing
as well. It's about stopping habits of greed, irritation and confusion.
It's about stepping back and ceasing.

Throughout the day, during work periods and in meditation, we can
reflect on how much the mind gets swept up in activity and in
identifying with that activity. We can also reflect on how this tendency
moves the mind toward restlessness and agitation from which we lose our
center: One little push, the ball starts rolling, and pretty soon we've
worked ourselves into a state of anger and conflict. With desire, it
often starts with the merest sort of interest, which then becomes
liking, fascination ... and then we begin to lose control. We don't
know how to stop this momentum of desire because we're not used to
stopping. It's also helpful to reflect on the occasions when we do
happen to stop. We might ask ourselves, *Does stopping mean I can't
function? Or is it more so that when I stop and stand in awareness, I
accomplish things more skillfully than when the mind is swept up by
moods and thoughts?*

These reflections help motivate us to learn how to stop the mind, how to
stop the flow of proliferating thoughts and moods that draw us into
attraction or aversion. If we learn how to stop the mind and exercise
that skill frequently, then even in challenging circumstances, we will
be able to bring things to a point of stillness inside and return to a
clear center of awareness.

So how do we learn to stop? When we feel the mind moving and
proliferating, how do we stop and come back to a place of awareness
where we can attend to what the mind is doing and is intending to do? To
begin, we can recognize when the mind has stopped on its own. Then we
can observe what stopping itself feels like---the actual *experience* of
ceasing to engage with mental activity and mental impulses. Once we
become familiar with how stopping feels, we'll know when our conscious
efforts to cultivate stopping are on the right track. It's helpful to
make this cultivation into a regular exercise---something to frequently
work, play, and experiment with.

Certainly we need to engage in activities and attend to our duties and
responsibilities, but we can bring an attitude of stopping into the
midst of this activity, whether it's the stopping of obsession, worry,
fear, competition, aversion, or whatever. We may try to replace such
unwelcome mind states with something we feel is more appropriate for
"good Buddhists," but trying to replace one thing with another is yet
another form of doing. Instead, if we simply attend to stopping, we
learn to trust in fundamental clarity and wisdom.

# The Intruding Sense of Self

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-19-13

It is uncanny how the sense of self tends to intrude on everything,
whether it is in our meditation, when we are working, doing chores, in a
group or by ourselves. That sense of self keeps rearing its ugly head
and creates suffering and a burden that we carry with us. Sometimes we
think that coming to live and practice in a monastery is solely about
relinquishing the world, but the heart of relinquishment is giving up of
the self and the perception of self. Upon very close examination, the
feeling, the projection, and the perception of self is nothing more than
smoke and mirrors and does not have any real substance.

We have this self-referential obsession: comparing ourselves to others,
worrying about how we are doing, how others perceive us or how we
perceive ourselves in relationship to the past, present and future, and
it becomes incredibly convoluted. If we take a good look we can
appreciate how much of a burden all of this is. I believe this sense of
self-obsession has never been as strong as it is now in modern culture.
Before, most people's sense of self had to do with relationships---one's
relationship to family, village or tribe. But in modern society
everything ends up being about *me*.

In our practice, we are trying to recognize this perception of self,
seeing how we keep buying into it, giving weight to that feeling or
perception, and recognizing that each building block of self is simply
an impermanent phenomenon. It isn't a matter of trying to get rid of the
self or annihilating it in any way, because it's not something that is
solid or substantial anyway. That's why we reflect on the five
*khandas–*form, feeling, perception, mental formations and consciousness
– seeing them as impermanent, unsatisfactory and not-self. When we see
the five khandas for what they are, we gain insight into their true
nature and let go of our investment in them–which is not a rejection or
annihilation, but a clear seeing.

To be free of the world and worldly tendencies, we need to take leave of
the world. Taking leave of the world means taking leave of the
self-making, I-making habit. In the Buddha's idiom, when we buy into the
notion of self, it is an affirmative action we are doing:
*ahaṅkāra-mamaṅkāra-mānānusayā,* the I-making, my-making, based on the
underlying tendency of conceit. It is the action of getting ourselves
wrapped up in the perceptions of self---and believing in them.

As we go about our day, we can reflect, investigate, and challenge these
assumptions about the self and be willing to work with them over time.
These assumptions are deeply ingrained in the mind, so examining them,
making this process conscious, and being aware of that self perspective
is a central part of our practice.

# Contented With Little

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 11-19-13

I recently read that in 1985---which is not so long ago---the average
American purchased about 32 new articles of clothing per year. By 2010
it was up to almost sixty---and that was when the economy was in a
tailspin. It seems many people are becoming more and more focused on
consuming, without much consideration for what they already have.

By contrast, part of the ethos of living in a monastery as a
*samaṇa---*a religious seeker---is developing the qualities of
simplicity, frugality and the care we take in using and reusing things.
For instance, I have a cold now and have been blowing my nose quite
often---I don't know how many times a day. So I try to emulate Master
Hua, who would use the same tissue over and over again, until it became
apparent that it could no longer be used again. I must admit that
despite trying, I cannot match his austerity in this regard. However,
it's a good illustration of frugality and taking care of what we
use---we don't need to throw a tissue away after only using it once, but
instead, we can keep reusing it until it's completely worn out.
Simplicity and frugality are about doing little things like that: paying
attention to *all* the things we use, taking care of them and avoiding
waste. Living like this helps protect the culture of modesty and
contentment we've established here.

There's an idiom in Thai that refers to "one who is contented with
little." Reflecting on this can inspire a life without complication. We
can live very simply, being conscious of how we use things, and,
contrary to what one might think, this doesn't make us miserable.
Contentment is quite the opposite of misery. Living in a conscious way
like this can make us happier by fostering internal qualities that lead
to ease and well being. We realize that we don't require so many things
to keep us happy and comfortable. It's an internal experience based on
internal qualities.

# Luang Por Chah's Approach

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-23-11

Student: I've heard that in the beginning, Luang Por Chah used to lock
the doors of the Dhamma hall during the all-night sits.

Luang Por Pasanno: I wasn't there back then. But he did have us sit in
meditation right after the meal in all three of our robes---in the hot
season! Over time, however, he came to rely more on wisdom than brute
force.

S: What caused him to make this change?

LPP: Well, he learned that it was better to create the right environment
for practice than to try to turn people who didn't want to practice into
practitioners. He had a simile. He said: "If you created a nice pasture
and cows came in, they would eat the grass. If animals went into the
pasture and didn't eat the grass, then you knew they weren't cows." That
was his way of saying that if you create a good place for practice, real
practitioners will practice. Other people won't, and there's no point in
trying to change them.

S: Did he ever provide similes indicating that people can improve?

LPP: Every simile has a specific point, and it doesn't work outside of
that. Ajahn Chah definitely encouraged people and told them they could
do it if they tried. They had the teachings, and they were in a good
environment. So if they tried, they could succeed.

S: I've heard that he often encouraged people to stay in robes even when
they didn't want to.

LPP: That's right. For instance, there was Ajahn Toon. Every year after
the Rains Retreat he would ask Ajahn Chah if he could leave the
training, but Ajahn Chah would refuse. This went on for five years.
After every Rains Retreat, just like clockwork, there would be Ajahn
Toon with his offering of flowers and incense respectfully asking to
leave the Saṅgha. Ajahn Chah would always talk him out of it or
sometimes just get up and walk away. Ajahn Toon ended up staying a monk,
and now he's a really good teacher in our lineage.

# The Benefits and Drawbacks of Change

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 10-22-12

There is a feeling of change today since the rain has come. The rain on
the roof is an unfamiliar sound after months and months of dry summer.
As I came down this morning for *pūjā*, there was the smell of moisture
in the air. We can pay attention to that feeling of change.

The mind tends to look at things from a one-sided perspective. We might
be people who love the warm summer and hate the cold rainy time, or we
might like the colder wet weather and hate the heat. But nothing is ever
one-sided like that. Everything has its benefits and drawbacks, and the
Buddha instructs us to investigate that.

This includes investigating the drawbacks of things we like and are
excited about. It's starting to get cool, the dust has settled, the
plants are coming out, and the forest is regenerating---these are the
benefits of this lovely weather. At the same time, a gutter is leaking
and dripping down the side of the wall onto the deck and needs to be
repaired.

There was a group of Pau Auk Sayadaw's lay disciples who were planning
on coming up today to have a look at Abhayagiri. They were thinking
about how to develop their new property for Pau Auk and were excited to
see what we've done here. However, we received an email from them this
morning saying that, with the new rain, they found leaks in several of
their buildings and need to fix them right away. So they have to
postpone their trip for some time.

There are benefits and drawbacks to everything. If we think in terms of,
*I like this,*or *I don't like that,* we end up trapping ourselves. By
looking at experience from a broader perspective and applying Dhamma to
it, we can more easily recognize that everything has two or more sides
and see more clearly how problematic it is to take a personal position
on what we are experiencing. That way we're not investing in the
I-me-mine of how we think things should be. Rather, we're examining the
way things are, reflecting on both their benefits and their drawbacks.

# Earthworm Practice

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 11-23-08

With the drawbacks of physical existence, the Buddha instructed that we
reflect on the theme of death as an antidote to our interest in being
reborn into the conditioned realm. These reflections are meant to bring
up a sense of urgency: there is no time to waste. There aren't unlimited
opportunities for spiritual practice. We have excellent conditions right
now, and we should make use of them. The image that the Buddha uses for
this sense of urgency is a person whose hair is on fire. There's a real
motivation to put that out, to deal with the situation.

It's easy to put things off, to find various good and logical excuses to
be pulling back a bit on our effort. The motivation for making the
effort, for putting attention back onto the practice, can lose its
quality of urgency. We may turn to some social engagement, some
conversation, some distraction, and it might be interesting, it might
have some tangential benefit, but we must realize the need to set that
aside and return to being mindfully attentive to what we're doing.

One of the problems with having a sense of urgency is the feeling of
flailing around---putting out effort in a sporadic way and not being
able to sustain it. We start off enthusiastically, really buckling down:
*Okay, back to the practice, I'm really going to stick with it this
time.* Yet we're not able to sustain it. We swing back and forth.
Sometimes the results of our efforts might not seem so dazzling. They
might not make us think, *Now I'm really getting somewhere!* They may
not even seem interesting. So we can get frustrated and pull back and
then, sometime later, it's: *Okay, time to buckle down again.*But
consistency is what's important and paying attention to being
consistent.

I remember Ajahn Chah's advice on how to maintain constancy in the
practice, addressing the issue of first wanting to really push and then
feeling frustrated, "Can you learn to practice like an earthworm? They
can't know where they're going, but they keep moving along. So get your
head down, simply go forward, just have earthworm practice. Keep moving,
constant and consistent."

# Avoiding the Second Arrow

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 11-15-13

The obvious thing for me right now is carrying this cold around: a thick
head and not much energy. It's helpful to reflect on the reality of
illness or discomfort that is natural and happens all the time. What
comes to mind is the Buddha's discourse on the two arrows. Being struck
by one arrow is painful and being struck by a second is painful as well.
In terms of feeling, because each of us has a body, it is quite natural
that we experience unpleasant sensations. And due to having a mind, it
is also natural that we are sensitive to the sense contacts we
experience. These are qualities of the first arrow. Becoming averse,
worried or anxious about unpleasant feeling---or planning and
proliferating about how to escape from sense contact---is the second
arrow.

We can't avoid the first arrow, but we can avoid the second arrow.
Because we have physical bodies, because we exist, our bodies naturally
get ill and our minds change. There are always going to be certain
elements of unpleasant feelings. Even the Buddha himself experienced
unpleasant feelings and had physical ailments, like a bad back. There
are places in the suttas where the Buddha turns over his teaching role
to either Ānanda or Sāriputta because his back is too sore to continue
sitting and teaching.

We can recognize and be attentive to the first arrow and not turn that
arrow into something that then creates more complication, difficulty,
and pain. We can reflect on that as we go about the day, asking
ourselves, *What are my reactions to unpleasant feelings? What are my
habits and tendencies?* We can develop mindfulness and discernment to
receive the first arrow skillfully and not look for ways to be struck by
the second, third, or fourth arrow.

# Not Reaching For The Stars

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-21-13

In an ideal world, a summer day like this would be 80 degrees with a
gentle breeze. In reality, it's 108 degrees, and the air is not moving
at all. How do we handle the contrast between what's ideal and what's
real? We can moan and whinge, or retreat into fantasy and desire, but
from the Buddha's perspective, it's always about establishing a sense of
clarity and equanimity within the reality of the present moment.

With something like the weather, it's fairly easy for us to see our
unrealistic hopes clearly and accept them for what they are. But in
other areas, it's more difficult. For instance, living as we do in a
spiritual community, we may hold to a utopian notion that everyone here
should be mindful, peaceful, contented, and harmonious. And it's
true---we should be. But we can keep in mind that this "should" is based
on an ideal. The reality is oftentimes quite different. So it's
necessary to learn how to navigate those times when we, or others,
aren't living up to the elevated principles that we hold. To do that, we
can reflect on whether it's realistic to expect everybody to live up to
our lofty notions simply because these notions are what we would like or
prefer. We can reflect on how well we personally adapt and respond to
the realities of our existence and see that it is often difficult to
live up to our *own* ideas of perfection.

This doesn't mean we should throw out all the ideals we have and tell
ourselves to forget it. Holding to wholesome ideals can be a skillful
thing to do. But we need to be very cautious of measuring ourselves
against those high values all the time. Doing that exacerbates
dissatisfaction, discontent, and a sense of suffering.

In former times, navigation at sea depended on frequently checking the
stars with a sextant to set and maintain a realistic course of
direction. It wasn't about trying to reach the stars! In a similar way,
as practitioners we merely need to set ourselves on a wholesome,
skillful course; we don't need to constantly frustrate ourselves or
others by trying to comply with unrealistic notions of perfection.
Usually our ideals---even wholesome ones---are filled with wishful
thinking and fantasy. So it's important to ground our elevated standards
in reality. By doing that, we can find a realistic course of action that
supports our living skillfully. Applying the Dhamma in our day-to-day
lives, we can learn to live with each other and with ourselves in a
beneficial, wholesome way.

# Inner Stillness

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 07-28-05

As I was reading some teachings by Ajahn Munindo, a phrase he used
resonated with me, and I find it useful to bring up and contemplate. He
spoke of inner stillness; specifically, trying to attend to things, such
as performing one's duties, or engaging with what needs to be done, with
a quality of inner stillness.

Often the mind is impinged upon by the notion that it should be
reacting, moving, or shifting. It's like the mind is waving its arms
around trying to get attention: "Don't forget about me!" But if we
return to inner stillness rather than going to the excitement, the
movement, the reactions, and the ups and downs of the mind, then we can
start to see arising and ceasing more clearly. We can recognize the pull
of a particular impingement as simply something else that arises and
ceases. This allows the mind to settle, which in turn fosters the
quality of inner stillness even more.

Though our minds may come up with their justified indignations or
justified attractions, if we hold these things within a framework of
inner stillness, then we can make a choice to stop ourselves from being
pulled in different directions. Instead, we can surround ourselves with
this quality of inner stillness, and allow that to be what informs our
practice and our engagement with the outer world.

Practicing in this way with our many duties will affect the experiences
we have back in our dwelling places---when sitting or walking in
solitude---so that this alone time, too, can be imbued with the quality
of inner stillness.

# Attending to Feeling

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 01-18-04

There are many aspects of experience we can use as a basis for our
investigation and focus; and there are many styles and types of
meditation we can practice. But no matter what our focus is, no matter
what type of meditation we are using, it's important to recognize that
our practice is contained within the Four Foundations of Mindfulness
that the Buddha laid down as the way to freedom, liberation and
purification.

One of these Four Foundations is mindfulness of feeling, or vedanā. Now
in this context, "feeling" does not mean emotion, which is its common
meaning in English. Rather, it refers to the feeling tone of experience,
of which there are three kinds: pleasant, painful, and neutral. One
reason to focus on feeling is that it's an integral part of every mental
state---everything we experience has a feeling tone. Whether we're
experiencing a bodily sensation or a mental sensation, we're feeling it.
The Buddha points to the fact that feeling tone conditions the mind.
Specifically, the quality of our feeling conditions how we perceive and
proliferate about the sensations we experience. The pleasant, painful,
and neutral tones create conditions for the mind to move, proliferate
and build complex emotions and reactions. So in terms of the practice,
we need to come back to the underlying feeling tone to directly
understand how the mind is conditioned and how this complexity is
created.

So often we're dragged into the reactions of the mind---the stories it
spins out---and we fail to see what underlies those reactions. Usually
we're not quick enough to recognize that feeling is where our thoughts,
emotions and reactions are coming from. But by using the breath, or some
other aspect of the body, we can learn to stay present with experience,
to stay present with feeling. In this way, whatever feeling tone there
may be---pleasant, painful or neutral---we have a handle with which to
investigate what is conditioning the mind, what is conditioning our
emotions, and how we respond to the world, our circumstances, ourselves
and the people around us.

# Feelings Don't Need to Be Problematic

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 01-18-04

No matter whether one is an ordinary, worldly person or an enlightened
being, everyone experiences *vedanā:* pleasant, unpleasant and neutral
feeling. It is inherent in the nature of contact with the world around
us; it is inherent in the nature of having a body and a mind. The Buddha
points out that the difference between someone who is enlightened and
someone who is unenlightened is that, for the enlightened person, those
different feelings are not a cause for creating suffering, creating
confusion or creating problems. It's not problematic to experience
something that is painful or something that is pleasurable or neutral.
It needn't proliferate in the mind or condition the mind in a way that
is conducive to suffering.

The Buddha uses the image of someone who is struck by an arrow. A person
who is unenlightened experiences it in a worldly way---both the
unpleasant sensation of the contact, as well as the unpleasant sensation
of suffering and dislike. In this way, that person experiences not only
the pain of *one* arrow, but *two*. By contrast, when an arrow strikes a
person grounded in wisdom and clarity, they experience the unpleasant
sensation of the physical contact, but they don't create unpleasantness
within the mind; the mind simply won't go to a negative or an unpleasant
state. People like that don't create suffering out of contact with
feelings. They experience only one arrow, not two.

In terms of practice, it's essential to start distinguishing between the
first arrow and the second, to recognize where the mind moves and what
it creates around different sensations, contacts and feelings. By
attending to that, we develop spiritual qualities conducive to wellbeing
and happiness, qualities that lead us out of the entanglements of the
external and internal world.

# Striking at the Heart of Renunciation

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-05-13

One of the teachings Ajahn Chah emphasized most consistently was on the
theme of uncertainty*---*that everything is not for sure. In a
monastery, for instance, it's common for the number of visitors to
increase, like today, and then decrease; they're here for a while, then
they disappear. This creates a constant sense of circumstances being
uncertain, always changing.

We tend to conceive of our practice and training as being under
conditions over which we have some control. We can take this opportunity
today to investigate and reflect upon how we deal with our practice when
it becomes apparent that conditions are really not under our control,
when the monastery becomes an open house for more activity and people.

When circumstances change in a way we like, we tend to get excited and
happy; when they change in a way that we don't like, we may get upset
and irritable. In both cases, we're being swayed by the circumstances
around us, and that's a shaky foundation on which to build our practice.
So how can we stay present with what's happening without getting lost in
the changing circumstances? The way to do that is through the quality of
our attention---how we direct our attention, how clear we are, and how
mindful. But mindfulness isn't always going to be present. For this
reason, establishing an internal quality of renunciation is
quintessential for us as practitioners.

The rules and conditions that are part of living in a monastery create a
framework of external renunciation, such as the giving up of material
things. That framework is in place to support an *internal* quality of
renunciation, which needs to be cultivated at all times. Internal
renunciation means we're not desperately holding on to circumstances,
moods and feelings. Giving up material things is not that difficult.
When we give up our moods, views, opinions and preferences we are
striking more at the heart of renunciation.

We learn to bring this quality of renunciation into our daily lives and
interactions with others, so that, when circumstances change, we can let
go and adapt to them. Today, for example, there's a large group of
people visiting and things are happening all around us. If we try to
control the situation---try to make things happen the way we
want---we're likely to create problems. But everything will run smoothly
if we turn to this internal quality of renunciation, doing our best by
letting go of our moods, views, and preferences.

# Maybe This Buddha Isn't the Same as the Old Buddha

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 04-24-13

Ajahn Chah used to emphasize the need for steadiness in our practice,
especially with our application of effort---finding a level that pushes
the edge a little bit, but is also sustainable and doesn't lead to our
burning out. Sometimes we want to focus on tangible results, and it's
certainly gratifying to feel we're really getting somewhere, that
something's really happening. But I think it's much more important to
focus on this kind of steadiness.

Steadiness requires patience. We need that patient quality of mind which
is resilient and able to endure the different moods that come up---the
highs of being exhilarated about the practice, and also the lows we
inevitably experience. Moods oscillate like this; it's natural. So to
achieve steadiness, patience must be applied along with effort.

The Buddha uses the image of water dripping very slowly into a huge
earthen jug, drop by drop. If we focus on the individual drops, it may
seem like nothing much is happening, as if the jug will never get full.
But if the water continues to drip, slowly but steadily, the jug *will*
fill up over time. It's unavoidable. In the same way, steadiness and
continuity of effort paired together with patience will bring results in
our practice, even if it seems like nothing much is happening.

There's no need to aim for a sudden, spectacular impact or achievement.
It's tempting to hold onto the image of the Bodhisatta sitting under the
Bodhi Tree, resolving not to move until he had become enlightened, even
if his blood dried up and his bones crumbled. We say to ourselves,
*That's inspiring. I'll try to do that.* Once when a monk said that to
Ajahn Chah, Ajahn pointed back at him and said, "Maybe *this* Buddha
trying to do that isn't same as the *old* Buddha." What Ajahn meant was
that the Bodhisatta's resolve was the culmination of hundreds of
thousands of lifetimes spent building the *pāramī*, with steadiness and
patience.

So that's what we focus on---this steadiness of effort and patient
endurance. Put them together and let them work for you.

# The Dedication of Merit and Blessings

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-15-13

The dedication of merit and blessings is a practice that is very common
and ordinary in Buddhist cultures like Thailand. This practice helps
counteract our tendency to focus on the problems, the flaws and the
obstacles we believe we have to overcome, whether real or perceived. We
can set all that aside, and instead, bring our attention to the
conditions in our lives that are blessings---those conditions that align
themselves with what is meritorious and good.

It's not so difficult to do. If we think of the surroundings we're
in---they're about as idyllic as we could hope for. We're not oppressed
by war, famine, or pestilence. It's an incredibly fortunate time and
place we live in. These are blessings. And while we are under government
regulation with our building codes and other mundane details, the
government doesn't prohibit monasteries like ours from existing. So we
have this opportunity to live here, in an American Buddhist monastery,
and to practice the Dhamma.

In addition, there are so many people who freely offer their support to
us. We have more than adequate food, dwelling places, clothing and
medicine. We're supported every day by people's generosity, and we live
in dependence on them. It's essential for us to recollect that
truth---that blessing---and by frequently practicing the dedication of
blessings to others, we can keep that recollection fresh in our minds.

As monastics, we are not only on the receiving end. It's also our role
to give and to share. In carrying out this role, we have the opportunity
to reflect on what we are offering, and to reflect on our attitudes with
regard to giving. This is one aspect of making sure we are worthy
recipients. And it underscores the fact that our relationship with those
who support us is one of mutual generosity, which is, in itself, a great
blessing.

Now just consider the culture of virtue that's been established here.
We've all committed ourselves to living in a virtuous way, with
integrity, according to the moral precepts. That too is a blessing, to
live in a situation where there is this quality of integrity and trust.
It supports, uplifts and encourages us.

So these are some of the many blessings that we're virtually swimming in
here. By bringing them to mind, we are able to share and dedicate them.
They can become a field of blessing and merit, not just for ourselves,
but for others as well. And so, attending to our blessings, bringing
them to mind, reflecting on this field of merit---this is important to
do as we go through our day.

The foundation for this practice is selflessness. That's what really
brings about the sense of merit and blessing---we are willing to set
aside our personal agendas and preferences, our views and opinions and
everything that comes out of our obsession with "me" and "mine."
Certainly, these things come to the surface in all of us, and I'm not
suggesting we deny or try to annihilate them. Rather, this is about
redirecting our attention away from self-oriented concerns, so that we
can step into this field of blessing and merit.

There is a verse from the Dhammapada where the Buddha instructs us to do
things that are aligned with what is good and meritorious. He encourages
us to do them over and over again because, as we develop an affinity for
acting in that way, it will lead to our ease and well-being. This
certainly applies to the practice of dedicating merit and blessings. It
is something that can hold us in a place of ease; and if we are grounded
in that place as we apply effort in our practice, our efforts will be
held within that same quality of easefulness.

There is a lightness to experience when people live with a sense of
generosity and selflessness. We can share in that, and dedicate the
goodness of merit and blessings that come from it.

# Putting the Four Noble Truths Into Action

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 04-22-13

As we bring the practice into our daily lives, it's immensely beneficial
to use the Four Noble Truths when viewing experience---in our formal
mediation, interactions with others, and engagements with various
duties. This is not something to save for later---after studying the
suttas, developing all the *jhānas* and formless absorptions, all the
psychic powers, we finally contemplate the Noble Truths and become
enlightened---it's not like that. The Four Noble Truths are to be put
into practice right now.

To do this, we need to establish a habit of reflecting and investigating
in a particular way: First, by examining phenomena carefully---the
quality of experience, and the results that come from interacting with
experience in the usual way---we find there's always some kind of
*dukkha*, some kind of suffering, stress or discontent. Then we reflect
on that, investigating its cause, and how to bring about its cessation.
When applying these steps, we're not viewing the world through the lens
of self, of me and my problems, me and my accomplishments, me and my
preferences, me and my views and opinions. We're looking instead from
the perspective of dukkha, its cause, its cessation and the path leading
to its cessation. When we view experience like that, life becomes very
simple and straightforward.

So we lift up that perspective in the mind and practice with it. We're
not waiting patiently for some intuitive insight to arise spontaneously.
We need to deliberately train the mind by frequently redirecting our
attention and reflecting on experience in that way.

The Buddha gives us the practice method of using the Four Noble Truths
as a lens to depersonalize experience. And when we use the right method,
he says, beneficial results are bound to follow; if we use the wrong
method, however, our efforts will be futile. To illustrate these points,
the Buddha offers some humorous similes. For example, he says that when
we're wrongly seeking the fruits of practice, we're like a man seeking
milk: knowing that milk comes from cows, he approaches a nursing cow,
twists her horn, and then wonders why he doesn't get any milk. The
reason, of course, is that he's using the wrong method. But if he were
to use the right method by pulling on the cow's udder, then the milk
would surely flow. In the same way, even if we understand the Four Noble
Truths in principle, nothing significant will result if we keep those
teachings in our heads as mere abstractions. That would be using the
wrong method, because the most essential bit is missing: bringing the
Noble Truths into our practice. On the other hand, when we do put them
into practice and apply them skillfully---that is, when we use the right
method---then we are bound to realize beneficial results.

Paying attention to the method and its application, putting it into
practice, bringing the Four Noble Truths into our experience, reflecting
and applying these Truths: this is how we can reap the fruits of
practice.

# Clean Kuṭi, Clear Mind

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-13-13

Keeping our kuṭis, our dwelling places, in order helps to keep our minds
in order as well. So anytime we leave our kuṭis, we should make sure
everything is put away, neat and tidy.

It's easy to let things slide, to tidy up only once a week, or whatever.
But if we have a habit of letting things get a bit messy before tidying
up, we're apt to develop a somewhat lax attitude about everything, which
would make it very difficult to lift up and sustain clarity in
meditation. By contrast, when our attitude is to keep things tidy,
moment to moment, we're developing the same quality of mind needed to
stay with our meditation object, moment to moment, which allows the mind
to settle and clarity to arise.

Just as maintaining an orderly kuṭi helps to keeps the dust and dirt
from finding places to hide in our living environment, it also promotes
the mental qualities needed to expose those places in the mind where the
defilements hide away, unobserved. When we're trying to understand the
subtleties of the mind, we don't want to have dark corners where the
defilements can hide, because they'll tend to hang out there forever. So
we need to develop habits like this, which assist us in keeping the mind
spacious and perceptive. That way, we can see our conditioning, our
mental patterns---everything in the mind that creates suffering and
discontent.

This mundane task of keeping our kuṭis in order can be extended to our
general environment as well. This is a part of our training to make the
mind clear, steady, and discerning. When we are consistent with this,
these qualities will become part of the mind's normal way of being---its
default setting. We won't have to make an effort to lift them up in the
mind, because they'll already be there for us, primed and accessible.
This in turn will make the mind bright and ready for work.

# A Balanced Perspective for Our Views

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 04-17-13

As most of us know, when bringing the practice into our daily lives,
it's necessary to apply mindfulness. But it's also necessary to ensure
that our mindfulness is operating under an appropriate and beneficial
view or perspective. If we are mindful, but our view is misguided, then
it's likely that we're mindfully following some sort of bias or
obsession.

In order to keep on the right track, we need to question the views we
superimpose on our experience. One way to expose those views is to
notice the way we react to experience with comments and assumptions such
as, *This is really good---I like this. This is awful---I don't like
this.* Reactions like those are habitual and need to be questioned.

When the mind assumes it likes an experience, it tends to block out the
negative aspects in order to prop up the view, *I like this*. So we need
to deliberately bring up the negative side for examination, asking
ourselves, *What are the drawbacks? What are the pitfalls in this? How
might I get hooked by it?* In the same way, when the mind experiences
something it assumes is undesirable or challenging, we need to look at
the situation from another perspective and ask ourselves, *What's the
beneficial side of this experience? What can I learn from it?*

When we examine our experience from both sides in this way, it makes us
more flexible with regard to the views we hold. Instead of habitually
seeing things as all black or white, we can open to a more balanced
perspective from which we can see that experience is never just black or
white---it's always a mixture. Without this balanced perspective, we
tend to go through cycles of elation and depression, excitement and
frustration, and then wonder why that's happening. Well, in all
likelihood, it's happening because we've attached ourselves to some sort
of all or nothing view.

Ajahn Chah encouraged us to question our views of experience by having
us ask ourselves, *Is this for sure? Is this really what's happening?*
By doing that, we can better adapt to whatever circumstance we find
ourselves in, because we're no longer preoccupied with trying
desperately to force circumstances to be the way we like them. And it
becomes easier to be mindful and present with experience as it unfolds.

So whether we're attending to our duties, engaged in some kind of
interaction or alone, we need to question the habitual views and
reactions that come up for us. Otherwise, those views and reactions will
toss us around like a feather in the wind---wherever the wind blows,
that's where we'll land.

# A Mirror on Desire

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-02-05

Reflecting on the four requisites---clothing, food, shelter and
medicine---we can try to be more clear about what we need and what we
merely want or desire. This can often become a bit cloudy in the mind.
If we try to rely on what is truly necessary for a simple life, and
question the desire or feeling of need that comes up, then things can
become a bit clearer, and we are better able to understand how it is
that desire keeps pushing us around.

Our lifestyle is so simple that the mind focuses on things very strongly
and builds a case for what it thinks it really needs. But when we
reflect, investigate, and question, we realize that it isn't actually a
need at all---it's just another desire. So use the requisites as a means
to understand the mind; use them as a mirror to see clearly what appears
in the mind and what the mind is scrambling to get.

Having this prescribed lifestyle is very fruitful and encourages us to
reflect more clearly about the nature of our desire and attachments.
Being an alms mendicant with requisites and living in the monastery with
this fundamental simplicity gives us a clear opportunity to unravel the
way the mind complicates things, makes things problematic, and takes us
away from fundamental contentment. The tools of our lifestyle are the
Vinaya, the teachings, the requisites, our day-to-day activities, and
the practice itself. We don't necessarily live by an extraordinary
standard, but we use these tools that give us the opportunity to
reflect, investigate, and learn to understand the mind in and of itself.

# Caring for Everything We Use

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-01-05

Throughout the day it is helpful for us to recollect that we are a
community of alms mendicants. We rely on what is offered to us as gifts
of goodwill: robes, alms food, shelter and medicine---the four
requisites. Traditionally, in Thai monasteries the monastic community
brings the requisites to mind as part of its formal morning and evening
chanting. The chants encourage the monastics to ask themselves, *Did I
use the requisites skillfully? Was I heedful when I used them? Do I
understand their true purpose?* We too should reflect in this way. It's
easy to expect that everything will be there for us and that everything
will be of good quality. But as alms mendicants, the emphasis is on
contentment with what we have and being circumspect with what we are
using.

There's a story about a monk who was cleaning Ajahn Maha Boowa's kuti
and threw away two used matches that were on the altar. When the Ajahn
returned to his room, he asked his attendant, "What happened to those
matches? They weren't used up yet!" It was Ajahn Maha Boowa's habit to
use partially burnt matches for transferring the flame from one candle
to another candle or to other objects; he wouldn't dispose of a match
until it was completely burnt out. This example can inspire us to
develop a sense of using things fully. The focus is not on our
convenience, but on recollecting that these things are offerings; they
have value, and we shouldn't waste them.

Another aspect of our relationship with material things has to do with
respect and compassion for others in the community. It's really basic:
make sure that people don't have to pick up or clean up after you.
Return things to their proper place. After using a tool, put it back
where it belongs, rather than leaving it out for someone else to put
away. In the kitchen, putting a used dish in the sink doesn't magically
make it clean and placed back in the cupboard. A real human being has to
do that. We show respect and compassion for others by being considerate.

Beyond that, take responsibility for setting things right, even if they
are not your assigned responsibility. If you see that something is out
of place or hasn't been done, don't just walk by and leave it for
someone else. Take the responsibility and initiative to be helpful. If
everybody learns to take responsibility in this way, then it's not a
burden for anyone.

Whether we are in the monastery or elsewhere, we rely on the requisites
and other material items for our daily existence. Looking after these
things is just an aspect of mindfulness---attending to what we're doing
and what needs to be done in the present moment. This is not so mundane
that we don't need to think about it. We learn to incorporate the way we
care for material requisites into our day-to-day practice of mindfulness
and cultivation of skillful qualities. The material realm will then
become a more harmonious and pleasant place in which to live.

# Underlying Tendencies Associated with Feeling

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 01-18-04

The Buddha says there are different underlying tendencies associated
with each of the three feeling tones (*vedanā*). Pleasant feeling has
the underlying tendency of desire. Painful or unpleasant feeling has the
underlying tendency of aversion. Neutral feeling has the underlying
tendency toward delusion. It's important to notice how feeling typically
proliferates in the unenlightened mind. We drift into desire and seeking
when something pleasurable is happening; we drift into aversion,
negativity and dislike when something unpleasant is happening.

It doesn't take much to trigger these tendencies. I received a funny
email from a friend the other day. He had some moles burned off at the
doctor's office and was asking whether we'd heard his screams at the
monastery---even before the doctor actually touched him! The mind tends
to spin out with the aversion associated with unpleasant feeling, but
it's only an underlying tendency. Just because the underlying tendency
is there, we don't have to buy into, follow, or get caught up in it.
It's merely a tendency---just something triggered by an unpleasant
feeling, which arises and ceases. It's the same with neutral feeling.
The tendency is toward delusion and confusion. We tend to be
dissatisfied with something that's neither pleasant nor
unpleasant---that's the delusive quality of the neutral feeling tone. We
can't be patient or content with it, we can't simply be aware or clear
with it, and we try our best to get out of it.

When we feel stuck in neutral, we might try to stimulate some sort of
pleasant feeling---or even an unpleasant one---so we can at least feel
*something*. But trying to wring a pleasant or unpleasant feeling out of
nothing isn't at all satisfying. It's delusive and confusing because
we're trying to get out of something that's quite natural---it's merely
a neutral feeling. Our experience comes with just three different
feeling tones, so if we fail to investigate the neutral one, we're
neglecting one-third of our total experience. Actually, *most* of our
experience is predominately neutral, that is, it's not clearly pleasant
and not clearly unpleasant. Simply sitting here right now, the tone is
much more neutral than anything else. But the mind can't bear to stay
with that very long. It looks for something else and then creates a
story to fill in the details. This is the conditioning factor---the
*citta saṅkhāra*---in action.

When the mind is stuck in the underlying tendency of delusion, rather
than being supported by awareness and wisdom, we find ourselves in a
sorry state. To counteract that, we can use the breath and the quality
of awareness to cultivate a steadiness of attention. This becomes a
doorway through which we can understand all the different kinds of
feelings we experience. By using the neutral in-breath and out-breath as
our foundation, we begin to understand how the mind proliferates and
conditions itself.

# The Khanti Pāramī

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 04-07-13

It is helpful to contemplate how to use *khanti*, patience, in our daily
practice, and how we can cultivate it as a mental attitude during
meditation. Patience is an underrated *pāramī*and considered in
different ways, sometimes even misinterpreted. I remember Varapañño
Bhikkhu disparaging himself, saying: "I just don't have any pāramīs of
wisdom, meditation, loving-kindness or anything like that. But at least
I can just put up with this. I can build some khanti pāramī." It had a
sweet Eeyore type of attitude to it.

Khanti is actually a proactive engaging with experience in a way that's
not getting caught up in or swayed by the reactions and impulses of
either liking or disliking or of desire and aversion. It has an enduring
quality to it. One of the phrases the Buddha uses to describe the
impulses of mind is *abhijjhā domanassa*, desire and aversion or a
gladness-sadness type of impulse. We can try to have an enduring and
patient attitude toward that so we're not reactive. When we're not
reactive, then desire and aversion, liking and disliking go their
natural way, and they cease. So when we're engaged in some sort of
interaction, whether it's pleasant or unpleasant, the mind isn't getting
swept up in it. Similarly, when we're engaged in some kind of task,
chore or duty, and we have been cultivating patience, then what comes to
mind is a kind of gravitas, a sense of weight, ballast or anchor in the
mind that isn't pulled around.

I've never come across a satisfying translation of khanti: patient
endurance doesn't quite get it. In general, I think it's important to
reflect on it in terms of how it manifests for us: *How do I turn the
mind towards a quality that isn't swayed, pushed, or pulled?* It's a
willingness to be present with experience and especially important in
meditation. When any of the five hindrances come up, they feel quite
compelling and true as moods. So we attempt to have an enduring quality
of mind that is present with the hindrances and attends to them as they
follow their natural cycle: arising, persisting, and ceasing. They come
into being and pass away. One of the functions of patience is to help us
refrain from feeding our defilements. When we're not feeding or
nourishing our reactive moods, then there's a real steadiness there.
With khanti present we're not trying to manipulate conditions around us
so that they suit our preferences or to manipulate people to make them
pleasing to be around. Neither worldly conditions nor people are going
to fulfill our preferences or desires. But when we have khanti to
receive our experiences, then we're not shaken by them.

As part of the ethos and flavor of Ajahn Chah's training, the
development of the khanti pāramī was strongly encouraged so we would
have a good, solid foundation in our practice---a foundation that helped
to steady us despite the changing circumstances and conditions of our
lives.

# Worldly and Spiritual Feeling

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 01-18-04

As I've mentioned, we can use *vedanā* (feeling tone) as a doorway for
understanding our experience, and in practice, it's a simple and
straightforward thing to do. But in the spirit of full disclosure, I
should also mention that the Buddha's teachings on *vedanā* can get
quite complicated. There's a discourse where one disciple of the Buddha
says to another, "There are three kinds of feelings." The other disciple
responds, "No, I distinctly heard the Buddha talk about *two* kinds of
feelings." So they go to the Buddha and he says to them, "Well actually,
you're both right. Sometimes I talk about the two kinds of feelings,
sometimes I talk about the three kinds of feelings, sometimes I talk
about the five kinds of feelings, sometimes I talk about the six kinds
of feelings, sometimes I talk about the eighteen kinds of feelings,
sometimes I talk about the thirty-six kinds of feelings, and sometimes I
even talk about the 108 kinds of feelings."

Then he explains: The two kinds of feelings are bodily feelings and
mental feelings. The three kinds are pleasant feeling, unpleasant
feeling and neutral feeling. The four kinds are painful and pleasant
feeling in the bodily sense, plus painful and pleasant feeling in the
mental sense. The six kinds are those that arise through the eye, ear,
nose, tongue, body and mind through the six sense doors. The eighteen
kinds are the feelings that arise from the different modes of contact
consciousness. Each of those eighteen feelings can be worldly or
spiritual, which makes thirty-six. And each of those thirty-six can be
past, present or future, which comes to 108. So we have this multitude
of feeling types. Among all those, it's important to recognize the
distinction between the "worldly" and the "spiritual."

*Sāmisa*is feeling associated with the world, the material, the senses
and the sensual realm. It's the experience of feeling that leads one
into pleasure, pain, liking, disliking, wanting, not wanting; it brings
agitation and excitement. *Sāmisa* maintains the worldly connection to
suffering, confusion, agitation and restlessness.

*Nirāmisa*is feeling without worldly or sensual engagement. The
experience of feeling *nirāmisa sukha* (spiritual pleasure) is of
stepping back from material or worldly pleasure and of moving toward the
pleasure associated with spiritual qualities. That is, we experience
this pleasant feeling while recognizing its limitation, its impermanence
and its changing nature. Or, as Ajahn Chah would say, "It's just that
much." When one sees the limitation, the boundary, the necessity for
things to change, then feelings don't shake, proliferate, or confuse the
mind.

# Using Pleasant Feeling

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 01-18-04

In the discourse on Mindfulness of Breathing, this is what the Buddha
said when instructing on *vedanā* (feeling): "Experiencing *pīti* (joy),
the meditator breathes in. Experiencing pīti, the meditator breathes
out. Experiencing *sukha* (happiness), the meditator breathes in.
Experiencing sukha, the meditator breathes out." The feelings of pīti
and sukha are to be cultivated, experienced and developed, not pushed
away or shut out. The vital function of these pleasant feelings is to
allow the mind to settle.

In another discourse the Buddha said, "The worldly person only knows one
escape from painful feeling, and that is sensual gratification." But we
know it's quite limiting to rely on sensual gratification as the
alternative to painful feeling. And so, as people cultivating the path
of the Buddhas, we instead turn to the qualities of heart and mind
developed through pīti and sukha. We've all experienced those qualities,
otherwise we wouldn't be here. The joy and happiness that arise from our
spiritual cultivation, our meditations, our reflections, our
virtue---these are commensurate with the path of the Buddhas.

As practitioners and meditators, we turn attention to that realm of
feeling and delve into it, using it as an object to make pleasant
feeling conscious. It's a valid object of meditation, as we know from
the Mindfulness of Breathing sutta---taking up pīti or sukha and
allowing the mind to absorb into that feeling and enjoy the meditation.
But sometimes we can feel almost guilty about it, thinking to ourselves,
*I shouldn't be having so much pleasure meditating; it should be hard
work.* Or we buy into the no-pain, no-gain paradigm, in which meditation
must be painful to produce progress on the path. It doesn't have to be
that way, however. In fact, when the mind experiences pain in
meditation, it can react with the underlying tendency toward aversion,
resulting in a sense of being oppressed.

Pīti and sukha are inherent qualities of the mind that allow it to focus
and settle on one point and become stable. Of course, if we're obsessed
with making that happen---desperately trying to produce pīti and sukha,
fearful of any twinge of unpleasantness---it's not going to work. And
truly, there's no need to struggle, because it's natural for the mind is
to take interest, settle, and become composed. We can bring that aspect
of the mind into consciousness and allow it to inform the meditation, so
the mind comes together and settles in a profound manner. As pīti and
sukha become pronounced, agitation can drop away. In this way, pīti and
sukha have a role---a necessary part to play---in cultivating the heart,
cultivating steadiness, cultivating *samādhi*.

# Becoming a Somebody Forgetting About Everybody

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 04-28-13

As human beings, we each have a propensity for wanting to become a
distinct *somebody*. This propensity shows itself almost constantly,
both in formal practice and in our ordinary, day-to-day activities. It
has to do with the hopeless search for worldly security and stability.
Most people spend their whole lives on that search, but instead of
finding security and stability, what they get is a sense of
isolation---not really attuning to themselves or to the world around
them. If we're not careful, this can be a danger for us here, as well.

A prime example is the way we relate to our assigned duties and chores.
We become the somebody who manages the book distribution, or the
somebody who looks after the computers, or the somebody who does the
trash, or whatever. We home in on the particular thing we're doing, and
then conjure up a sense of ourselves as being the somebody who does that
thing. Then it's easy to think: *Alright, I have my task. I don't have
to do anything more than that. I don't have to be concerned anymore with
what needs to be done outside of my job*.*I'm safe and secure; things
are okay.*

That sort of thinking blocks us from developing mindfulness and
attentiveness in huge areas of our lives---the world we're in and what's
happening around us. Thinking like that can cause us to feel isolated.
We set ourselves apart from the community, weakening our connection with
all the other somebodies here who are doing other things that need to be
done.

To avoid these dangers, rather than being somebodies who do only what
we're assigned, we can instead be attentive to whatever might need
doing. We can ask ourselves: *How can I help? How can I support the
other people around me?* *What would be of service?* When everyone
reflects in that way, and acts accordingly, the whole community can
enjoy a sense of well being and happiness. And we may personally learn
that there's no real need to make ourselves into somebodies at all.

# Embodying Experience

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 04-09-11

This morning I was recalling how James Joyce described one of his
characters: "Mr. Duffy lived a short distance from his body." In Dhamma
practice, we're learning how to inhabit our bodies and our experiences
of having a body. It's easy for us to become dissociated or distant.
It's as if bodily experience becomes a projection of the mind, or we
find ourselves treating the experience of having a body as if it were an
abstract concept. This doesn't end up being very fruitful for us.

In his seminal discourse on mindfulness of breathing, the Buddha uses
the verb *paṭisaṃvedeti*, which means to *fully experience* the body, as
we breathe in, as we breathe out; to *fully experience* feelings, as we
breathe in, as we breathe out. It's a quality of inhabiting what is
truly going on for us. If we stay even a slight distance from what we
experience, then we don't see it clearly. And when we don't experience
things clearly, we tend to create problems for ourselves.

That is why, when the Buddha taught the Four Noble Truths, he also
taught a specific duty or response for each truth. For the Noble Truth
of *dukkha*–the experience of suffering, discontent, dissatisfaction,
stress–he instructed that this has to be fully known. It's not until we
fully know the experience of dukkha that we can begin to understand how
we're contributing to it, getting entangled in it and a part of its
cause. The Second Truth---the cause of dukkha---is to be relinquished;
the Third Truth---the cessation of dukkha*---*is to be realized; and the
Fourth Truth---the path or practice leading to the cessation of
dukkha*---*is to be developed. But it all begins with the First Truth:
fully knowing.

Over and over again, the Buddha encourages us to develop our practice by
fully engaging with and fully knowing what we encounter and experience.
This is the very foundation on which the practice rests.

# The Impermanence of Feeling

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 01-18-04

A central focus of our practice is to recognize the impermanent nature
of *vedanā,* the feelings we experience. The Buddha said feeling is like
a bubble on the water in the rainy season. During the Indian monsoon,
rain drops hit water and create air bubbles. They don't last long; they
quickly pop, then appear again, and pop again, over and over. That's
exactly how we experience feelings---a flow of bubbles. But each and
every one of those bubbles is empty. The pleasant-feeling bubble, the
unpleasant-feeling bubble, the neutral-feeling bubble---each bubble
arises out of conditions and then pops. It's empty---when it pops
there's nothing left; it isn't there any more. And then another bubble
arises. It's important to recognize the impermanence, the instability,
the changing quality, the transient nature of feeling, so that we're not
blinded by it.

Now when I say feeling is empty, I don't mean it doesn't exist. The
feeling is real, but it's not substantial; it arises, establishes itself
for what is usually a short period of time, and then it ceases. We can
notice that truth when working with the breath. The feeling tones keep
changing, but the mind cranks out story after story, trying to make the
feelings into more than what they are. The reality is, feelings are
insubstantial and impermanent.

When we can stay with the qualities of knowing, awareness, and
discernment, those feelings can be experienced from a place of
stability, and we find it easier to relinquish and let go. The feelings
are still there, but they are experienced in a very different way, so
that there is a quality of balance and wisdom.

# Responding to Wholesome Crowds

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 04-14-13

We are preparing for the annual *kaṭhina* ceremony today and visitors
have already started arriving. In terms of our practice, everything that
happens on occasions like this is merely sights, sounds, smells, tastes,
touch, and mental objects. We tend to make a problem out of sense
contact, but it's just that much, nothing more. Objectively speaking,
what's taking place here? The day begins, there is a wave of people and
activity that comes in---it arises. The day ends, the wave of people and
activity goes out---it passes away. It's another arising and
ceasing---an opportunity to pay attention to the way that things come
and go.

Of course, there's more to deal with and manage today, because the
number of visitors will be high. That's the reality of what's happening.
But we don't need to get excited about it, create a story around it,
worry about it, or try to get away from it. Rather, we can ask
ourselves, *How am I holding all of this?* Are we able to return to
mindfulness, over and over again? Do we have the ability to sustain a
sense of clarity, discernment, kindness, and wellbeing? We can chose to
let go of excitement, confusion, irritation, and aversion. Reactions
like those are extra and completely unnecessary.

In terms of a monastic community, we're solely dependent on the
generosity of the lay community, and this is a time when that generosity
is being vividly displayed. What can we offer as a gesture of
appreciation for this generosity that gives us the ability to live our
lives? It isn't through our getting swept up in excitement. It isn't
through our shrinking away because of irritation. It's through our
ability to hold a steadiness and clarity in our minds. Our ability to be
clear and steady has a lot more value than the short-term satisfaction
of allowing our minds to get swept up in our reactions. This ability is
the basis for our practice, but also serves as a model for others. And
that's what the world needs. It's a wonderful gift when people come to
the monastery and see a model of wisdom operating in a group of people.

There are people coming---that's not an illusion. So help each other,
pay attention to the situation and look after what needs to be done. Be
ready to respond with kindness and attentiveness to the people who
arrive. Express your heartfelt appreciation. These people are here to
offer support for the monastery. That kind of generosity is something to
delight in, with a sense of gratitude.

# Blown Into Cosmic Dust

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 04-13-13

The Buddha encouraged us to contemplate aging, sickness, and death every
single day. It's essential that we make an effort do that, because the
mind's nature is to forget about these contemplations. It inclines away
from them and, instead, inclines toward thoughts of eternal youth and
health. For the most part, death doesn't exist for us. So we have to
make it conscious in our practice by realizing the limitations of the
human condition on the physical level. We're bound to this body that's
constantly aging. Even when we're young, it's still aging. The reason a
baby gets born in the world is because it's too old to stay in the womb.
And that aging process continues on after birth.

This is a supportive reflection for us---it's not intended to make us
miserable or depressed. It's intended to bring up wholesome mental
states to counteract the mind's tendency towards *pamāda---*being
careless and not very circumspect regarding the truths of our existence.
These three recollections help establish a sense of heedfulness and
spiritual urgency. We have this opportunity to hear the Dhamma, to study
the Dhamma, to practice the Dhamma, to live a life in accord with the
Dhamma. Reflecting on that makes us grateful for this opportunity to
practice, and that's vital, because it's easy to let the opportunity
slip by.

So we recollect the nature of the human body---that our lives are
subject to aging, sickness, and death. For all of our seeming solidity,
we're left to nature when we die; our bodies dissipate and disappear.
The Buddha taught the charnel ground contemplations, which encourage us
to examine the body's process of dissolution after death. It changes
shape, bloats, disintegrates and dries out until just the sinews and
bones are left. The bones are then scattered until there's little
remaining but a small pile of gray dust. Then a wind comes along and
blows it here and there until there is nothing left. For all of our
obsessions about ourselves---our worries, fears and anxieties around
health and physical wellbeing, and all the uncertainties in our
lives---it is absolutely certain that, on a physical level, we're all
going to be blown into cosmic dust.

Now when we contemplate that fact, it's not to be picked up in a
nihilistic way, but rather with the sense of urgency that's needed to
establish the heart within skillful spiritual qualities---the sense of
urgency we need to keep attending to our actions of body, speech and
mind, so that they're conducive to clarity, wisdom, and wholesome states
of mind.

Everyday we recite the Five Subjects for Frequent Recollection. When
reciting the fifth, we recollect: "I'm the owner of my kamma, heir to my
kamma, born of my kamma, related to my kamma, abide supported by my
kamma. Whatever kamma I shall do, for good or for ill, of that I will be
the heir." These recollections help us establish our kamma---our actions
of body, speech and mind---in what is wholesome, skillful and
beneficial, in what bears fruit in terms of peace and clarity, happiness
and wellbeing. So it behooves us to take responsibility for these
contemplations, to reflect upon them and develop them in our practice.

# Using the Breath to Balance the Mind

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 04-09-13

It has been nine days since we ended our three-month retreat, which
seems like a good time to remind everyone: Don't forget to connect with
mindfulness of the body and mindfulness of the breath. With the body,
use the simple rhythms of moving from one place to another. Attend to
that. Make it an anchor for developing mindfulness and awareness.

As for the breath, Ajahn Chah would often say, "People complain that
they don't have time to meditate, but do they have time to breathe?"
Well, of course we have time to breathe. But if we don't direct our
attention to our breathing, then our attention slides by, and we end up
absorbed in proliferation, expectation, irritation or whatever. So we
must remember to consciously bring attention to the breath. Then we can
learn how to *use* the breath.

To begin, notice that breathing in has a different effect on the mind
and body than breathing out. When we breathe in, there's an expansion of
the body---we are bringing in the life force, expanding and energizing
what one might call the system of our existence. That's different from
breathing out, which is a release, a settling, a stopping. These
distinct qualities have different effects on the mind. By knowing that,
and by paying close attention to what's happening, we can use the
different effects of our in-breaths and out-breaths to work with the
mind when it's out of balance.

For instance, if the mind is leaning towards dullness and wanting not to
deal with things, we can consciously attend to the in-breath and the
energy it brings---enlivening, expanding and brightening the mind. At
other times, the mind may be leaning towards distraction, doing and
becoming; then we need to pay more attention to the out-breath, allowing
the mind to settle down. By working with the breath in such ways, we can
balance the mind, attuning ourselves with each in-breath and out-breath.

When we engage in any activity, whether sitting in front of a computer
or out on the trail with a rake, we are still breathing, still occupying
a physical body within the world around us. Each activity is an
opportunity to inquire of ourselves, *Where is my attention going? Am I
aware of the body, of my in-breaths and out-breaths? What is needed to
find a place of balance and clarity? Does the mind need lifting up, or
settling down?*By doing this, we are caring for our practice throughout
the day, not just during morning and evening meditation. We are
developing the continuity of practice that is needed for the most
beneficial results.

# One Breath at a Time

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-28-12

Distributing the daily work assignments seemed a bit complicated today.
That's the nature of organizing many people living together. When there
is one person living in one place, it's fairly simple. With two people
it's a little harder, and it gets exponentially more complicated the
more people there are who need organizing.

For this reason, we need to learn the skills of living together, so that
our own interactions and how we relate to each other don't get overly
complicated. And in general terms, as practitioners, it is essential
that we cultivate the quality of simplicity in the ways we relate to
things. In reality, there is one moment at a time, and we take one step
at a time when we do things. It's not all that complicated.

But the mind tends to leap forward towards proliferation, so we need the
patience to step back and ask ourselves, *What do I have to deal with
right now?* Mostly all we have to deal with right now is breathing in
and breathing out. There's not much to do. If there is a task to be
done, then we can learn how to apply patience and attention to it. We
put attention on what we are doing, the way it impacts the people around
us and the circumstances we are in.

As we do this, we realize that the morning has passed, another day has
moved on. Very simple. We can recall this quality of simplicity as we
pay attention to the reactions in the mind, the moods that keep popping
up, and the proliferations that keep hounding us. We can remember: *One
breath at a time, one step at a time*. It's all very uncomplicated, and
there's not much to be done.

# Opening or Collapsing to Experience

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-27-13

As we apply our practice to the circumstances in which we find
ourselves---whether we are working in the kitchen, out on the trails or
in the office---we apply mindfulness to the present moment while also
connecting and establishing our continuity of mindfulness to the posture
of the body. There's a natural tendency, as we are sitting at the
computer, working in the kitchen or out on the trails, to move forward
and hunch. We can make this habit conscious, re-grounding and
reconnecting with the body by opening up the chest and breathing
comfortably. We are not trying to strut around with a military
posture–we can open the body, the chest and the heart base by expanding
our posture. Another way to see it is opening up our presence to how we
engage with the world around us.

With the habit to collapse in and slump forward we can try to
continually bring in that sense of an expanding and spacious presence.
These are little reminders with which we can ask ourselves, *Am I
present? Am I here?* If we do this, we end up acquiring a continuity of
awareness that is then brought into our sitting meditation. When we are
sitting in meditation, if we are slumping and collapsing our posture and
not really putting effort into the present moment, we tend to collapse
in the mind as well. Ajahn Chah put a lot of emphasis on continuity and
steadiness in practice and training. This is shown in the little things
that we do and not in some sort of major heroic activity. We continue to
place our attention on the body and the present moment with a sense of
opening. It's an important attitude to carry into our daily practice.

# A Day Worthy of Veneration

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-30-11

This evening is the night of our Lunar Observance. It's an opportunity
to recollect the refuges and precepts, and to reflect on the direction
we want to guide our spiritual practice. In the Thai language, the
Observance Day is called the *Wan Phra*, which means "Holy Day" or "Monk
Day," or maybe "Day Worthy of Veneration."

As Ajahn Chah used to say, the Buddha made these special days part of
our training, and it's not too much for the Buddha to have asked that we
observe them---to have regular days worthy of veneration. We do it once
a week. Over a month, we get four days worthy of veneration and
twenty-six ordinary days, which is a good balance. The problem is we
sometimes treat the days of veneration much like ordinary days, so we
end up with lots of ordinary days and not so many days worthy of
veneration.

The Wan Phra offers us a quiet time, a day for stepping back from the
busyness of our ordinary activities. Here at Abhayagiri, we consistently
encourage everyone to do that. For instance, we remind the community to
refrain from turning on the computer or continuing with work projects.
The Observance Day is a time to step back and keep the mind from being
cluttered with these kinds of activities.

By truly observing the Wan Phra, we have a regular day set aside for
reflection, a day to ask ourselves, *What do I take as a refuge? What is
worthy of veneration? How well do I interact with the world around me?
How might I cultivate virtue and integrity? How do I want to live my
life?* Reflecting like this is not aimed at setting the highest possible
standards for ourselves; it's not for trying to achieve theoretical
ideals. It's simply to recognize what's useful---what works to decrease
the discontent and suffering in our lives. Discernment of that nature,
cultivated on Observance Days, motivates us to turn towards
relinquishment, giving up, and letting go of things. This is central to
the Buddha's teaching and to the very ethos of our practice.

Observance Days are an opportunity to step back from the busyness of
ordinary activities, to reflect on our lives and practice and to
cultivate letting go. When used in these ways, they truly become days
worthy of veneration.

# The Experience of Change

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-25-13

The weather these days is itself giving us something to reflect upon:
Yesterday and last night it was raining. This weekend it's expected to
be over 100 degrees. It should be obvious to us that this is definitely
uncertain! Ajahn Chah kept encouraging us to investigate the truth of
uncertainty---that the nature of things is "not sure"---and to resist
the inner voice that says, *Without a doubt, things are going to be like
this, or like that.*

Of course, the external environment is only one source of uncertainty;
there's the internal environment, as well---our moods, perceptions,
thoughts, and feelings---and it's this internal environment that's most
important to examine. Sometimes we may think, *My practice is going
well. My practice is moving in the right direction. It's really a sure
thing ...* and then it changes. Other times we're feeling stuck in a
pit of difficulties and may think, *This is really what I am and
everything is hopeless. This is a sure thing ...* and that too
changes. It's important to point the mind toward the experience of
change, uncertainty, and impermanence, so it can see the true nature of
things. Doing this creates a sense of stability and develops the mind's
capability to know things---to know when we're upset; to know when we're
peaceful; to know when we're experiencing something wholesome. This
quality of knowing is our place of refuge.

The uncertainty of things is simply how they are. But it's the way we
*respond* to uncertainty that we need to focus on. That's what reveals
the areas in which we have more work to do, and the areas in which we
have a good handle on the practice. What happens when we experience some
difficulty and anger arises? What happens when we get what we want and
an experience of happiness and well being arises? How do we respond to
that? Do we take it for granted? Do we make assumptions? Do we create
certainty around it? Do we get caught up in it? Do we create a sense of
self around it?

Working with uncertainty in this way is our practice. It's what gives us
the opportunity to realize true peace. True peace cannot be found in a
passing mood or a state of mind. True peace comes through recognizing
the fundamentally uncertain nature of things.

As we go through our day, there's a constant, ongoing flow of change.
Pay attention to that. Whether doing chores, engaging with people,
sitting in formal meditation---be attentive, without forcing the mind in
any way. This is how we can strengthen our place of refuge, the quality
of clear knowing.

# Leave No Trace

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-11-12

There's an idiom in Zen: "Leave no trace." It's an attitude ascribed to
persons who do everything with clarity, efficiency and mindfulness. It's
helpful to cultivate this attitude, both as an ideal within the mind and
also in terms of the little things we do: paying attention so we do not
leave a trace behind us when we're engaged in our daily activities. This
can be helpful even with very simple things like preparing for pūjā or
getting ready for work. Wherever we go, we don't create a mess, we leave
things neat and tidy. After washing our robes in the washing room, we
wipe up the water around the sink; we make sure things are clean and
tidy when we leave. Leaving our kuṭi, we ask ourselves if everything is
neat and tidy. We see that everything is done in a circumspect, crisp
and clear manner. In this way, we can cultivate an attitude of leaving
no trace.

There's an image for that in the Zen tradition: Apparently, when turtles
walk their tails swing back and forth, sweeping away their footprints.
That image suggests not leaving a trail of debris behind us when we walk
from one place to another. Sometimes when the monks are getting ready
for pūjā or having tea in the monks' room, they open and close the
cupboards without thinking of others who can hear this. For those of us
sitting in the Dhamma Hall next door, it's
bang-crash-bang-crash-bang-thump-thump. So we need to be sensitive to
the impact we have on those around us and try not to leave a trace of
noise. In terms of our relations with people, we can reflect on the
things we say by asking ourselves, What kind of trace am I leaving in
this conversations by the comments I've made? With our internal
processes we can ask ourselves, What kind of trace am I leaving in my
mind due to the moods I've picked up or the attitudes, views and
perspectives I'm holding?

Instead of leaving behind the debris of our mental, spoken, and bodily
actions, we can cultivate an attitude of leaving no trace. One image
used for an enlightened being is a bird that leaves no tracks in the
air. That's a great reminder for us as we go about our daily tasks and
activities.

# Loving-Kindness and Living in Harmony

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-29-05

The Buddha taught the *Saranīya Dhammas*, which are the six principles
of conciliation or harmonious living. The first three of these Dhammas
are based on bodily, verbal and mental acts of loving-kindness. By
generating loving-kindness, we create a strong condition for the arising
of wholesome kamma. When we establish harmony with others, we build on
that foundation of loving-kindness. The fourth Dhamma, which encourages
sharing or giving, also has its basis in loving-kindness. When one is
living together in a community, as we do, this quality of sharing is
essential to creating a sense of mutual congeniality and care. The fifth
principal is virtue, which establishes trust---and thereby
harmony---among people living together. And when we trust each other, we
have a sense of mutual loving-kindness as well. The last Saranīya Dhamma
regards holding a Noble View of the potential for freedom, the ending of
suffering. When we see that we and others can realize this Dhamma, and
that our companions have the same View, it creates feelings of kinship
and kindness based on this harmonious perspective.

How do we bring up loving-kindness? What do we do when we feel it's
impossible? And when it does arise, what makes us lose it? For instance,
sometimes when I bring up loving-kindness myself, fear arises. The
Buddha taught that loving-kindness is appropriate in all situations, so
it is helpful for us to reflect on these questions and try to answer
them for ourselves. By investigating, we can learn to encourage and
sustain loving-kindness, to work with it and challenge any aversion we
may have to it. This doesn't mean we'll get it right all the time. But
we should reflect on how to bring about loving-kindness in our thoughts,
actions and speech, because it's through loving-kindness that we live in
a harmonious way.

# Only Part of the Picture

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-31-12

As we did with conducting the recent ordination---thinking through
things a bit, planning a little---we're developing a sense of
circumspection as we attend to whatever circumstances we're in. We do
this by asking ourselves, *How can I fit into this situation? How can I
be skillful, effective and composed?* Sometimes people can misunderstand
how to apply the Buddha's teachings on being present in the moment, and
they may think, *All I need to do is be present in this moment and
everything will be okay.* But that's only part of the picture.

The Buddha always encouraged his followers to recognize and pay
attention to the causal nature of actions. What we've done in the past
affects the present, and what we're doing in the present affects the
future. Having seen and understood how those principles play out over
time, we shape our behavior accordingly.

Sometimes there's an emphasis on having a nice, warm and fuzzy,
be-here-now kind of feeling. But in reality, when people are guided by
that sort of feeling, they're usually not very well connected with
themselves or the circumstances around them. The Buddha didn't advocate
that. Instead, he encouraged us to learn how to connect with the world
skillfully. And so we practice being attentive and effective with our
tasks, duties and interactions with other people.

When we learn to do that, we can build a firm foundation of clarity and
clear comprehension---*sampajañña*. The Buddha spoke of sampajañña as
clearly comprehending the circumstances we're in, the people we're with,
and the effects we're having on the world around us. With this quality
we can anchor our actions in our own non-delusion, non-confusion. And
when we apply sampajañña to our present-moment circumstances, it allows
us to see a much bigger picture.

# Supporting Defilements or Supporting Dhamma

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-09-12

In yesterday's reading, Ajahn Baen emphasized a question that is quite
commonly asked in the Forest Tradition. It's a very simple question that
we should consider and contemplate in our practice: *Am I supporting the
defilements, or am I supporting the development of Dhamma?*That very
simple contemplation is critical, because our preferences and biases
don't tend to lead us to question in that way. We tend to have thoughts
like,*What do I prefer? What do I want? What view do I think is right?*
Does that support our defilements of greed, hatred and delusion, or does
it support Dhamma? That's a question we don't often ask ourselves. But
we need to bring it up, not only when we're watching and investigating
the mind during formal meditation, but also during our day-to-day
activities.

And what is Dhamma? It has many facets, but importantly, Dhamma is that
which is aligned with the path leading to the cessation of suffering.
That's the whole point of the Buddha's teachings---to give us the tools
to free ourselves from discontent, dissatisfaction and dissonance. When
the mind or heart is dissonant, we can see that clearly as we become
aligned with Dhamma. And when the mind and heart are each in tune, we
can feel that right away, reflecting to ourselves, *This feels peaceful.
This feels clear. This brings happiness and wellbeing. This is the
opposite of following my attachments and desires, which always leads to
dissatisfaction.*

Again, it's important to frequently ask ourselves, *Is this supporting
the defilements or is this supporting Dhamma?* We ask this about our
actions and our speech. And we ask, *How am I establishing mindfulness
and inner cultivation?*This is how we develop the Dhamma in our hearts
and relinquish the defilements of the mind.

# Comfortable with Uncertainty

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-05-13

As we reflect on the traditional explanation of *aniccā*---how things
are impermanent, inconstant, always changing---it is especially useful
to also reflect on aniccā as a sense of uncertainty, or as Ajahn Chah
would say, "It's not a sure thing." We tend to deny or gloss over the
fact that we don't know things for sure. We feel uncomfortable with
uncertainty or uncomfortable with not knowing something. It can be
intimidating. But reflecting on aniccā helps bring us back to the
awareness of not knowing, of not being certain. And we can be aware of
the feeling that arises within us when we're in touch with that
uncertainty.

When we are out of touch with our awareness of uncertainty, needless
stress and suffering can occur. Take, for instance, the way it feels to
express some view that we later learn is wrong. If we ask ourselves what
it feels like when we express something that is wrong, we might say that
it feels awful, embarrassing, or uncomfortable. But actually that is not
really true. At the time that we're speaking, if we don't know that we
are wrong and there's no way to discern that what we have said *is*
wrong, then it feels just the same as when we are right, because at that
point we think that we *are* correct and believe that what we have said
is true.

As soon as we learn of our mistake, however, we likely will feel
embarrassed---but only if, at the time we expressed our view, we hadn't
been open to the real possibility that our view might be wrong in the
first place. In other words, if we have lost touch with the fact that,
like all views and opinions, "It's not a sure thing," then we may likely
feel ashamed or uncomfortable. But if we keep this notion of uncertainty
with all that we do and say then when we do make a mistake---an honest
mistake---based on some assumption rather than a deliberate lie, then
it's not so much of a problem. It's uncertain, and we don't need to take
it personally, thinking that, *I'm such an awful person, I never get it
right, I should have known better.* When we hold our thoughts and words
with an understanding that anything we say could be incorrect, it tends
to hurt a lot less. If we happen to be wrong, then we can shrug our
shoulders and say to ourselves, *Oh, is that so? Okay, no problem.*

This is true with the way we relate to our moods as well. They're often
screaming at us, *This is the way it really is!* To save ourselves the
needless suffering that comes from believing and acting on our moods, we
challenge them by reflecting, *Is this really true? Is it a sure thing
that it is unchanging and permanent? Is it trustworthy?*Well, not for
sure.

So, it's important to investigate and reflect on aniccā---to take it in.
When we do this, we're able to apply a true form of wisdom, which
doesn't require knowing a lot of things. This wisdom is the ability to
abide in a place of stability, even as we stay aware of and feel the
uncertainty of things.

# The Simplicity of Buddho

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-06-05

These last two weeks were supposed to be a time of retreat for me, but
it didn't quite end up that way. I had to catch up on work and help out
with some of the construction. While I was working, something came to
mind that I found very fruitful:

To work with the busyness---the activity that I was involved in---I
returned to the very simple practice of repeating the word "*Buddho*."
It's a basic, foundational practice that is used throughout Thailand,
particularly in the northeast. I used that short mantra in conjunction
with the breath. On the in-breath, "Bud," on the out-breath, "dho."
Buddho is the name of the Buddha. It means to awaken or to be awake.

The mind is so easily attracted to proliferation and embellishment:
*Give me a story, a drama, something to bite into---give me anything, so
long as I can play the starring role.* When we recite Buddho, we are not
feeding, encouraging or supporting the embellishment and dramatization
of experience.

On the in-breath, "Bud," on the out-breath, "dho,"---it's simple and
helpful. Because it is the name of the Buddha, it's a reminder of
bringing the presence of the Buddha into each in-breath and each
out-breath. It's bringing the recollection of the Buddha---both as the
Teacher and as the archetype of the enlightened being---into the heart,
the mind and consciousness.

Buddho is a powerful presence because it cuts through our tendency to
fill the mind with worries, concerns, desires, fantasies,
proliferations, ideas, ideals, views and opinions. All this clutter is
the antithesis of the enlightened being. We can remember that by using
this simple word. On the in-breath, "Bud." On the out-breath, "dho."

# How Do I Accord with Truth?

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-25-12

There's a tendency to look for some technique or method we can follow
and perfect, whether it's for cultivating mindfulness, concentration, or
whatever. This is helpful at times, but no matter what method or
technique we're trying to develop, we always need to consider whether
we're doing it within the framework of Right View---whether we're doing
it with a view that accords with Dhamma. If we're missing Right View in
the way we're applying and cultivating our practice, no matter what
method or technique we use, we're going to complicate things and create
difficulties for ourselves. So we need to keep turning attention inward
and asking ourselves, *How do I accord with Dhamma? How do I accord with
Truth? How do I align myself with a view that's in accord with reality
and in accord with the Buddha's perspectives?*

Generally there are three ways we view experience: Being drawn toward
the world, being drawn toward the sense of self, or viewing experience
in accord with Truth. Often we're entangled with, caught up in, or
propping up the feeling of self or the views and opinions that arise
from the sense of self. Or it's the pull toward the world, relying on
the world as a source of gratification, energy, or interest. When we're
aware of that happening, we can draw our attention back and ask
ourselves, *How do I accord with Dhamma, with Truth?* This is where that
sense of Right View is so important.

I remember a group of Buddhist teachers saying to Ajahn Chah, "We teach
about Right View. We've been studying about Right View. But what the
heck *is* Right View, anyway?" Ajahn Chah smiled and held up the cup he
was drinking from and said, "Right View is knowing that this is a broken
cup. It's just that much." So we need to recognize the impermanence,
uncertainty and unsure nature of experience, rather than making
assumptions about things from the bias of "my way" or from perceptions
of the world as good or bad. We might think, *Oh God. Everything is
falling apart!* Or *Everything is great and I'm going to get what I
want. The world is going to gratify me!* Well, not sure. We need to stop
and reflect to ourselves, *What is sure*? We may see that what is sure
is what we can know at this present moment. What's sure is we can make
choices and try to guide ourselves in ways that are skillful.

When we make those choices, it is helpful to recollect that we are the
owners of our actions, heirs to our actions, and that those actions have
results. As soon as we formulate an idea, often something will come out
of the mouth, or we do something with the body. Those actions have
consequences, good or bad. We need to take responsibility for that,
recognizing the causal relationship between particular actions and their
results. How do we attune ourselves to this cause-and-effect
conditionality?

We can begin by asking ourselves, *What's going to lead to my wellbeing,
happiness and peace? How do I avoid this confusion, difficulty, and
suffering?* And we can keep taking responsibility, reflecting over and
over again,*I'm the owner of my actions, heir to my actions, born of my
actions. Whatever actions I shall do, for good or for ill, of those I
will be the heir.* But in order to take responsibility like this, we
need to step back and clearly see: *It's not sure. I don't have to
believe my moods. I don't have to believe the world around me. I don't
have to get caught in conditions. None of it is sure.* Once this sinks
in, we can allow Right View and the Dhamma to guide us, rather than
allowing ourselves to be pulled by the conditions of the world or the
conditions of identity and self view.

# Enjoying That Enough-ness

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-02-12

It's beneficial for our practice to pay attention to how we use the four
requisites---robe cloth, food, shelter and medicine---and reflect on how
we rely on people's generosity and kindness when we receive these
offerings. Inner qualities that arise from reflecting in this way are
contentment and gratitude, which are said to be a source of the highest
blessings---*maṅgala*. These blessings are not only beneficial for us,
but beneficial for others as well. People become inspired and confident
when they see we are using the requisites in a wholesome way.

While reading Paul Breiter's book, *One Monk, Many Masters,* I was
reminded of Ajahn Chah saying, "I have never seen any rich people in the
world. I see a lot of people, a lot of visitors, but I've never seen any
rich people in the world. All I've seen is people who don't have
enough." That's a powerful reflection for us. No matter what the
external conditions of abundance are, it doesn't actually mean one is
rich or wealthy, because true wealth is not measured by the material
goods one accumulates. The richness of one's life---having true wealth
within the limits of the human condition---comes from having the ability
to be happy and peaceful within those conditions.

We are learning to find satisfaction with the qualities of contentment
and gratitude, rather than constantly seeking something more, something
different, or something other than what we have. That's the way the mind
usually works. The untrained mind is constantly seeking something else,
whether it's in the material realm, in the realm of views and opinions
or even in the realm of meditative states. It's constantly looking for
something else, not content with what it has or what it's experiencing.
The problem with the human condition is this constant seeking and, of
course, not really finding. So we need to learn how to be someone who
has enough, and to be someone who enjoys that enough-ness.

# According With Conditions

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-15-13

In terms of living as monastics and lay practitioners, there are two
helpful principles we can return to again and again in our daily life.
The first of these is learning how to accept and adapt to whatever
conditions we find ourselves in. This doesn't mean being indifferent or
not dealing with things, but really engaging with conditions in a
skillful, attentive way. With so many visitors coming to the monastery
today we may think, *I don't want this; it's not how I like it.* Or we
may welcome the interaction and find ourselves drawn into that contact.
Neither reaction is very skillful. The wholesome alternative is to be
mindful of the ways we react to the various conditions we encounter.
What are our habits? How can we develop habits that better accord with
Dhamma, that accord with changing conditions, so that a sense of
equanimity and balance is more readily available to us? That's very much
a part of monastic training in this lineage---and how Ajahn Chah trained
the monks who came to live with him.

The second principle is renunciation---*nekkhamma---*which is an
integral part of adapting to conditions. The English word "renunciation"
suggests that we're pushing away or running away from something. But
that doesn't reflect the real meaning of nekkhamma, which is a sense of
rising up to conditions with a noble attitude. It's a quality that
brightens the mind and allows us to engage with the Dhamma. If we
neglect opportunities to practice nekkhamma, we miss much of what
monastery training is for. Ajahn Chah used to speak about people who
became discontented while practicing in a monastery. They might leave
and go out into the forest, which was fine for a while, but then they'd
get fed up with the forest and go off to the seashore to practice, and
after a while they'd get fed up with that, so they would go off to the
mountains, and after a while they'd get fed up with that too. They
neglected to practice renunciation in the circumstances they were
in---they didn't engage or rise up to that opportunity.

So in our daily lives, it's important that we apply these two training
principles: accepting and adapting to conditions, while sustaining a
noble attitude of renunciation. These principles can serve as
aspirations for everybody, lay and monastic, because we're all apt to
spend so much time and effort trying to manipulate circumstances to get
what we want, grumbling and complaining about how things are. Instead,
we can learn to accommodate, rise up and meet conditions with a sense of
relinquishment, letting go of discontent. When we practice like this we
are likely to find that there is no need to make conditions into a
problem for ourselves.

# Centering on a Clear, Still Place

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-13-05

Having a sense of centering, whether we're doing chores or sitting in
meditation, can be a valuable practice for us. It's essential that we
remember to center ourselves---to bring things to a central place---so
that we're working from a still point, rather than having our energy and
attention diffused and scattered out into the world around us. As we
collect ourselves at that center point, it brings our energy together,
and we're able to see things clearly, without adding in our likes and
dislikes. Centering in this way provides us with a reliable place from
which to reflect upon the Dhamma, a place from which to apply the
teachings in our day-to-day lives.

# The Right Balance of Effort

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-12-05

Since today is a Community Work Day, it's good to reflect a bit on
effort. When we're working, how do we sustain our effort? How do we keep
the kind of steadiness and pace that allows us to put forth effort
without wearing ourselves out?

In meditation, we have a chance to notice how difficulties can arise
when we're focused on trying to get or achieve something in our
practice, when there's an agitated energy of doing. Or we can notice a
holding back of effort and how the mind can sink with that. With these
observations we better understand how effort works, and we can apply
this understanding outside of meditation as well. When we're working or
doing any kind of chore, it's helpful to consider how to apply effort so
there's a steadiness, not a holding back or sinking, and not an agitated
energy of doing.

We can also examine the way we limit ourselves through perceptions of
what we think we can do. When we limit ourselves with perceptions,
ideas, or fears, we're not able to put forth much effort. And contrary
to these perceptions and fears, if our effort is balanced, then the more
effort we put into something, the more energy we get back. There's a
nice feedback loop of supporting energy that comes from putting forth
the right kind of effort. When we learn to use effort in an appropriate
way, we find ourselves buoyed up by the energy coming from that.

Being able to apply effort with steadiness and balance is an important
skill. To develop this skill, we need to experiment with and look
closely at how we apply effort and the results of applying effort. When
we're able to apply ourselves in a steady, balanced way, we begin to get
a feel for what the Buddha meant by "unremitting energy, unwavering
effort." This is a factor the Buddha said is crucial for liberation.

# Nourishing the Spiritual Faculties

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-11-13

We just had Ajahn Dtun staying at the monastery, and he very generously
shared teachings with us. For most people here, I think, his presence
and way of being were uplifting and generated the arising of faith. Now,
whenever faith or confidence arises in us---whether from the presence of
a teacher or whatever the source---it's important to use that faith to
benefit our practice. The wholesome result of faith is the inclination
to apply effort or energy. In this way faith is nourishment for effort
and energy in our practice.

These two qualities are among the Five Spiritual Faculties:
*saddhā*,*viriya, sati, samādhi,* and*pañña;* faith, energy,
mindfulness, concentration and wisdom*.* None of these factors stands
alone. They support, feed and nourish each other. We need to attend to
saddhā---faith or confidence---in a skillful way, so that it helps
nourish the qualities of effort, mindfulness, wisdom and samādhi.
Together these qualities bring a steadiness of mind, a clarity of
awareness. In the suttas, the Buddha teaches that the Spiritual
Faculties are a direct source of awakening. So when we generate and
nurture them, we are directly nourishing the conditions for awakening.

In his teachings, Tan Ajahn Dtun emphasized samādhi---concentration or
collectedness of mind---the fourth Spiritual Power. In doing so, he also
specified that the function of samādhi is to stabilize and steady
mindfulness. Ajahn Chah taught this as well. This is important because
it's easy for us to get caught in up our preconceptions about the
various states of samādhi and its purposes. Having read or heard about
them from various teachers, we may misunderstand the chief reason to
practice samādhi---again, it's the stabilization of mindfulness. When
mindfulness isn't steady, we have to return to a wholesome meditation
object and use formal exercises for developing samādhi, such as the
mindfulness exercises described in the Satipatthana Sutta.

Further, samādhi and mindfulness are mutually dependent---each nourishes
the other: samādhi develops through the continuity of mindfulness
practice, and the stabilization of mindfulness requires a continuity of
samādhi. The continuity of samādhi and the stability of mindfulness are
essential components of the path to awakening.

Each of these wholesome and skillful Spiritual Faculties positively
influences and supports so many aspects of the Buddha's path. We can get
a glimpse of their power when we see them exemplified in the elder
teachers whom we come in contact with. So it's important that we take
full advantage of these teachings and teachers. They are invaluable
supports for our practice and spiritual cultivation.

# Knowing Wholesome and Unwholesome States

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-23-12

The work period and the regular chores we have in the monastery are an
extension of our practice; it's important to consciously bring that
point to mind. Otherwise, it's easy to fall into the habit of being
wrapped up in the excitement and enthusiasm we feel about the work
project we are doing or being indifferent and waiting for the work
period to be over. Whatever perceptions and attitudes we may have
regarding the chore we're doing, it's essential to take that chore as an
opportunity for establishing and sustaining our mindfulness. And this is
done with the help of *yoniso manasikāra*, skillful or wise attention.

As we were having tea, I spoke about the importance the Buddha placed on
yoniso manasikāra. Its function is to direct attention in an alert and
discerning way, no matter what we may be doing. Without yoniso
manasikāra, we tend to get caught up in proliferation, in a mood, or in
reactivity, because we haven't been attending closely to the situation.

The Buddha often described wise attention as knowing when there are
wholesome states present in the mind, and knowing when there are
unwholesome states present. It's also a quality that supports right
effort---generating the wholesome and discouraging the unwholesome. To
help with that, wise attention serves as an anchor for our mindfulness.
I tend to encourage mindfulness of the body---using the body as a
foundation for mindfulness and awareness, and for directing attention
skillfully.

As we go through the work period, and throughout the day, we can try to
carry our attention in a clear and discerning way. Once we develop a
continuity of wise attention, it will become a firm foundation for all
of our growth in the practice.

# One Who Sees the Danger In Saṁsāra

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-26-13

Contemplations and reflections on death and dying are a means of
focusing attention, and prioritizing where we choose to put our
attention. We can ask ourselves,*What is it we are becoming absorbed in?
What are we letting the mind run away with?* These are essential
contemplations because they help us make the practice---including
relinquishment and generosity---our first priority.

The literal translation of the word *bhikkhu* is "one who begs for
alms." But in keeping with the commentaries, Ajahn Chah used to
emphasize bhikkhu as meaning "one who sees the danger in *saṁsāra*," the
danger in the endless round of birth and death, the endless wandering.
That's a useful image for the unfocused, inattentive mind---the mind
that does not prioritize, that drifts aimlessly about. It wanders to
moods of like and dislike, moods of resentment and attachment, and
continues to wander on. This reflection on one who sees the danger in
saṁsāra applies to everybody, not only monks*.* It can encourage us all
to make good use of our faculties, to take the opportunities afforded us
through our bodies and our minds.

So we recollect and reflect on our impending death and the endless cycle
of saṁsāra, in order to sustain our attention and to keep the practice
as our first priority.

# One-Pointedness of Mind

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-10-05

Yesterday, I listened to a talk by Ajahn Munindo. He spoke of a
conversation he had with Luang Por Tate when Luang Por was about
ninety-four years old. He asked Luang Por Tate, "What is the heart of
Buddhism?" Luang Por answered simply, "One-pointedness of mind." That
statement may be simple, but it has many implications. The quality of
one-pointedness is needed to understand anything, to see and act clearly
rather than getting swept up by reactions or habits. So we must try to
focus and sustain one-pointedness by bringing attention back to what we
are doing.

It's so easy to get distracted by what's going on around us externally,
especially when doing chores or engaging with other people. Or, we can
get distracted by the internal wanderings of the mind---thinking about
how things could be, should be, reactions, worries or
doubt---proliferations in various shades and forms. We forget to
establish a base of solidity---a foundation for the mind.

For that reason, we need to remember the importance of one-pointedness
and to find skillful means to sustain it. In doing this, one-pointed
mindfulness of the body can be an important anchor. That doesn't mean
blocking out things around us, but rather, having a focal point. We
maintain one-pointed attention, returning to the posture, physical
sensations, movements, and touch. Whether we're going from here to there
or standing in one place painting, we can bring attention to our body
and cut through the mind's tendency to drift along.

If the mind is constantly drifting and dispersed, it will be unable to
approach things in a clear fashion. But as we maintain one-pointed
attention, a natural, energetic clarity arises. When it comes time to
think, consider and decide things, we will have the energy to do so. The
mind will be clear and able to perform its task well.

So again, we need to cultivate one-pointedness as our foundation. This
includes keeping precepts, composing the senses, and settling the mind,
while reflecting and investigating with wisdom. We cultivate this
foundation and let the practice grow from there.

# Waiting Patiently Like A Tick

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-22-13

Recently I read an extensive article on ticks and Lyme disease.
Entomologists use a technical term for what ticks do when they're
sitting on leaves of grass, waiting. It's called "questing" – questing
ticks. A tick waits patiently for an animal to come along. That's what
they have to do: sit there and wait. I can remember often being with
Ajahn Chah sitting and waiting. That's what we all do for much of our
practice. On one level, we might think, *I need to do something.* But if
we reframe it, we're simply sitting and questing---sitting and watching
our breath, sitting and waiting for the meal to happen, sitting up at
our kuṭis on our own. We can reframe how we hold these activities so
that we are patient with the circumstances we're experiencing, rather
than being prey to impulses and restless feelings that are so much a
part of the human condition. We're constantly moving to do something, be
something, get something, become something, accomplish something, or get
rid of something. Instead, we can come back to a framework of patiently
questing, deriving meaning and understanding from the experiences we
have and the circumstances around us, rather than constantly trying to
shift, move, and rearrange. So learn how to be patient like a sitting
tick and use investigation so that it can be a real quest.

# I'm a Lot Freer Than You Are

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-24-12

Yesterday, a group of us went over to the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas
for a commemoration of Master Xuan Hua's 50th anniversary of coming to
America. This morning while I was sitting, I remembered something said
by Doug Powers, a longtime disciple of Master Hua. He had mentioned
yesterday that Master Hua would both tease and challenge the students
who came to study with him in the sixties and seventies, because at that
time there was a strong ethos of people seeking freedom in many
different ways. Master Hua would say, "You think you're free, but I'm a
lot freer than you are." Our ways of trying to measure freedom---trying
to do what we want, when we want, how we want and where we
want---assumes that these ways will result in experiencing freedom. In
putting forth that challenge, Master Hua was questioning how people can
measure freedom when they are still following their greed, hatred and
delusion. How can they be free when that's the case?

For all of our attempts to be free or peaceful or whatever, we still let
greed, hatred, delusion, clinging, craving and confusion, not only
follow us along, but push us from behind, conditioning how we react,
respond, and interact with the world around us. If we spend our time
scattered, impulsive, and compulsive, and then sit in meditation a few
times a day hoping to be peaceful or free, what we find is that the
whole juggernaut of our daily actions dogs us around, and we get
completely swamped with the flow of our habits and reactions in the
mind.

By using the Buddha's path of practice, bringing mindfulness into our
day-to-day activities, we encourage a certain clarity, precision, and
circumspection with the things that we do. By doing this, we bring some
measure of freedom from greed, hatred, and delusion into the little
activities we engage in everyday. For example, when we clean up after
the meal or after tea time, what is the first impulse? Sometimes it's
simply to get up and move on to the next thing, engage in conversation
or whatever. We get swept up in our habits of mind. We need to create a
container for our habits, so that we can see them more clearly and
understand how we can circumvent or relinquish those tendencies. The
tendencies of our trying to get what we want, following our views and
opinions, reacting out of irritation or aversion, all of these things
are lacking in any solidity. But as long as we keep reinforcing them,
believing in them and following them, then these unwholesome habits grow
and sustain themselves. So we need to learn how to use the skills of
mindfulness and wisdom to put a wedge into the wheel of our habitual
unskillful tendencies, to slow them down, see them clearly, and
recognize that we have options. We have a choice and we can either
relinquish those habits or go against their grain.

# Slowing Down the Busy Mind

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-13-13

Even when we live in a monastery, the mind tends toward busyness and
proliferation. This is a natural habit of the human mind. We can make
ourselves conscious of that---not through a force of will, trying to
squelch or annihilate it---but through understanding the mind's natural
habits and the tendencies we carry with us. And we can work with them in
a skillful way. For instance, the mind tends towards speeding up and
gaining momentum. When that happens, we can consciously slow down and
pay attention. Sometimes this means physically slowing down, not to the
point of irritating everybody around us, but also, not getting pulled
into a sense that, *This is important. There's not enough time. This has
to be done now.*When we slow down, we can notice what *happens* when we
slow down: What happens is that we see things more clearly.

I've ridden in a car up and down Tomki Road to and from the monastery
countless times. These last few months I've been walking on the road
every day. It's a very different experience than riding in a car. When
we ride in a car, we might think we see or know Tomki Road quite well,
but because we're going so fast, we don't really see things clearly. By
slowing down and walking, I've been experiencing many more of the
nuances and details of the road, and there's more clarity as well. It's
similar with the mind. We can learn how to slow it down, so that when
we're engaged in activity, we can better attend to what we're doing. We
slow down the impulse of getting swept up in the mind when it's worried,
when it's proliferating, or simply chattering away. Of course, it's not
*necessary* for the mind to chatter away like this, but as long as we're
able to distract ourselves with that sort of thing, we feel it's okay.
This is not a great program for a practitioner!

Instead, we encourage ourselves to slow down. In particular, when we're
not engaged with work or duties, we can slow down by using walking and
sitting meditation. We consciously slow down by bringing attention and
awareness to the nuances of sight, smell, taste, touch, and mental
objects, and to the nuances of body, feeling, perception, mental
formations, and consciousness. Those things---the six kinds of sense
contact and the Five Aggregates---are what we use to create the sense of
self and "me" and to solidify our moods and impressions into habitual
tendencies. So we slow down enough to see them clearly. Learning how to
slow down is quite simple, and it provides us with many direct and
beneficial effects.

# Applying a Wholesome Attitude

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-19-12

Yesterday Ajahn Saññamo gave us a reading about sweeping leaves---how
sweeping can be an integral part of our practice. His reading came from
a book detailing the practices at Ajahn Baen's monastery. It is a big
monastery with large open areas, so every day, everybody goes out to
sweep. In his monastery, sweeping is part of the practice and training.
That's the way it should be for us as well---and not only with sweeping.
All the various chores, duties, and responsibilities we have are part of
the training. They're not simply things to fill the time, or excuses to
take a break from practice to get something "practical" done. Rather,
they allow us to examine the attitudes we bring to the activities we
perform and to evaluate the way we spend our time.

And how *do* we spend our time? Do we spend it thinking about ourselves,
and resenting anything that impinges on our preferences, views, and
opinions of how we imagine things should be? Or do we spend our time
engaged in what we do with generosity and kindness, with a sense of
relinquishment? Do we put energy and effort into our chores and duties,
or do we try to slide by, thinking to ourselves, *If people see me
moving around the place, maybe they won't notice that I'm not really
getting much done.* These are some of the attitudes we might bring to
our practice. It's helpful to skillfully engage with these attitudes,
because they can give rise to unwelcome, problematic moods. Once a mood
like that does arise---if we're engaged with what's going on---we can
respond with an energetic attitude, asking ourselves, *How can I shift
this mood in a positive way?*

There's a story Ajahn Sumedho tells about sweeping during his early days
at Wat Pah Pong. It is a standard practice in forest monasteries to
sweep the grounds, and Wat Pah Pong is no different. The day before each
Wan Phra, the bell would ring to indicate that it was time for sweeping,
and all the monks were supposed to go out and sweep the large, dusty
central areas of the monastery. Ajahn Sumedho relates how he didn't like
going out into the heat and the dust, nor did he like the activity of
group sweeping, so he'd usually wait to join the group until he was
about the last person to come out. Because he took so long to join the
group, he'd often get the last broom, which was usually some scruffy old
thing, made of a few little twigs that didn't really do much. Ajahn
Sumedho said he would go along and scratch a bit at the ground, stand,
wait, internally grumbling and complaining, saying to himself, *This is
really stupid. I don't like this. Why do we have to do this?* His mind
would go on and on. Of course, Ajahn Chah noticed what was happening,
and one day during the sweeping period he walked past Ajahn Sumedho and
said, "Wat Pah Pong---is it suffering?" Ajahn Sumedho reflected on this,
*Wat Pah Pong---is it suffering? No, of course not! Wat Pah Pong isn't
suffering! It's me! It's not Wat Pah Pong. I like Wat Pah Pong. I'm the
one making suffering out of this. It's me.* That was a powerful and
significant insight for him---to see that the external situation is one
thing, and whether or not he adds suffering to it is another. After
that, Ajahn Sumedho put more energy and enthusiasm into the sweeping. By
doing so and reflecting, he decreased the suffering for himself and
turned sweeping into an enjoyable experience.

We can use our chores in the same way---to bring up energy, a sense of
relinquishment, generosity, service, and mindfulness. And doing that
helps to provide continuity for our practice; it keeps us reflecting on
what's happening in the mind, what's going on with our attitudes and
perspectives. We can see more clearly the story the mind is telling us,
so we learn how to work with it in a skillful way. Sometimes it's easy
to focus on getting a particular chore over with, so we can go back to
our dwellings and do "our practice." In doing this, we forget that our
mental state and what's going on in the mind *is* our practice.

# Examining Uncomfortable Experiences

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-19-13

Two days ago it was the anniversary of Ajahn Chah's birth. Many aspects
of his life are well worth recalling and reflecting upon. Certainly one
of them is the practical approach he used to teach and encourage us. He
always emphasized the importance of reflecting on the Four Noble Truths,
and the experience of *dukkha*---suffering, dis-ease, discontent---and
the different ways we create dukkha within the heart. In this, Ajahn
Chah embodied the quality of fearlessness---he had no fear when looking
at the uncomfortable aspects of his own experience. By contrast, there
is a tendency many of us have to try and run away from the uncomfortable
experiences in our lives, to gloss them over or put some kind of spin on
them. Instead, we need to look at them closely, without feeling
intimidated.

I remember an example Ajahn Chah gave about this. He said, "Sometimes
you get a splinter in your foot. It's kind of small and you don't feel
it all the time, but every once in a while you step in a particular way
that causes you to be irritated by it. So the thought arises, *I really
have to do something about this splinter.* Then you carry on and forget
about it. But the irritation keeps returning until at one point you say
to yourself, *I really need to do something about this splinter now.
It's not something I can put up with anymore*. So finally you dig it
out. The experience of dukkha, or suffering, is the same."

It's not as if we're experiencing dukkha all the time; for the most
part, we live incredibly comfortable lives here. But there's this
recurring sense of dis-ease, discontent, dissatisfaction. We need to
make a strong determination to investigate it, understand it, resolve
it, relinquish it, not shrink back from it and really try to dig it out.
We are trying to understand the nature of the human condition---the
condition that keeps us cycling back to that feeling of dis-ease. It's a
willingness to patiently put forth effort and to work with our
experiences. This is an opportunity for us to learn how to do that in
our daily lives and to learn how to do that in our formal meditation.
It's possible to be carrying that investigation with us at all times.

# Appreciating the Goodness of Others

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-11-13

There are lots of us here living together in community, sharing the same
space. So it's vital that we share the space harmoniously to ensure that
things get done, like the external work of taking care of the monastery
and the internal work of spiritual practice. To lay a foundation for
living together harmoniously, there is a need to develop a sense of
*kataññū*, which is usually translated as "gratitude." Now the word
*gratitude* is a bit loaded in the West, sort of like somebody is
standing behind us waving his finger saying, "You should be grateful."
That's quite a repelling image, and it doesn't convey the real essence
of kataññū, which is the faculty within us that recognizes and
appreciates the goodness of others.

It's important to exercise this faculty of kataññū to counteract the
mind's tendency to focus on the things that irritate us, the flaws, the
unskillful tendencies. That's where our minds go, and we tend to weigh
ourselves down with negativity. I'm not suggesting we ignore or gloss
over the shortcomings we see. Rather, this is about moving away from
pointless negativity and, instead, recognizing and paying attention to
the things people do that are skillful and wholesome.

Living in a monastery as we do, it's easy to take for granted the
fundamental goodness of others. Goodness can seem so ordinary to
us---it's part of the culture we live in here, and the standards we keep
in that regard are quite high. So we may need to make a deliberate
effort to keep recognizing this "ordinary" goodness and to engender a
sense of gratitude for its presence. We make the effort to do this,
because this gratitude nourishes our ability to live skillfully, and it
helps establish wholesome states of mind. With our meditation, it's much
easier to become peaceful when this quality of gratitude is present in
the mind as opposed to when we experience negativity, which turns the
mind toward all the flaws we perceive in everyone. So pay attention to
gratitude---kataññū---learn to appreciate the goodness of others, which
will have the most beneficial results for our practice and wellbeing.

# The Dhamma of the Buddhas is Everywhere

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 05-27-12

As we engage in activity, we can ground our awareness in the body and
use it as a helpful anchor for our practice. We do this by having a
tactile sense of contact with the ground, contact with physical movement
and contact with the material world around us. This brings awareness
into the body, but it's also important how this awareness is held. The
Buddha's way of teaching and training is through questioning and
reflection. We're not trying to apply a catechism of, "The body is like
this," repeating it over and over again. The awareness is an
exploration, an investigation. We are asking ourselves, *What is the
experience I'm having? Does it feel comfortable or not? Does it feel
wholesome or not? Is this what mindfulness is, or not?* This kind of
questioning is not an intellectual analysis; rather, we are trying to
use contact as a mirror for reflecting and seeing more clearly.

We should, of course, reflect on the mind as well. *What's my mental
state right now? What's the intention? What's the volition within the
mind? Is this skillful or not skillful? How do I create and maintain a
quality of skillfulness?* This is the kind of investigation we can carry
with us throughout the day. Whether we are sitting in the Dhamma Hall,
back at our *kuṭis*, or doing our chores, reflecting in this way
internalizes our experience. It gives us an anchor for recognizing
whether we're on track or not, whether we're according with Dhamma or
have lost the plot.

We need to develop these essential skills so that they permeate every
aspect of our practice, no matter where we are or what we are doing. As
Ajahn Chah and so many other teachers have often said, "The Dhamma of
the Buddhas is everywhere. We don't have to go to the Pali Canon to find
it. We don't have to be sitting in a monastery to find it." It's the
ability we have to recognize and see the truth, to see the way things
truly are. It's everywhere. We can connect with it, we can contact it
and we can experience it.

# Making Uncertainty Clear

## Luang Por Pasanno

### 06-03-13

I received an e-mail the other day from Ajahn Ñaniko and Tan Ṭhitābho,
who recently left on their *tudong* from here to Oregon. They had
arrived safely at Steve's place in Willits and were camped out on the
floor of his shrine room, sore and aching because it was their first day
of walking. They weren't used to carrying all their gear for such a long
distance, but they'll get used to it. They were planning to leave
Willits yesterday and head up north. Who knows how far they might get
today, and where they'll be going on alms-round. That is part of the
adventure and part of the practice of taking on uncertainty,*aniccā*.

When we are out on the road walking like that, uncertainty is a constant
presence. In fact, wherever we are and whatever we are doing---whether
on tudong, or walking back to our hut, or working on a
project---uncertainty is a constant companion. But often we don't
acknowledge its presence. We tend to fall into assumptions of certainty,
assumptions that this is a sure thing or this is going to be a certain
way. We assume that everything is laid out clearly, such as how our day
is going to go, who will be here and what can happen. There is, of
course, a certain fallacy to those assumptions. It is important to
remind ourselves of the uncertainty of our existence, the uncertainty of
what is happening around us and the uncertainty of the things we rely on
for comfort, security and wellbeing. As a part of practice and training,
it is essential to keep bringing up the reflection of impermanence.

When the Buddha speaks about the universal characteristics of all
phenomena, aniccā is the very first quality he points to. In many
suttas, the Buddha expresses that it is essential to bring awareness to
the truth of impermanence. When we bring awareness to the truth that
everything is changing, it doesn't make us more anxious or fearful.
Rather, it brings a sense of clarity and immediacy. But uncertainty and
change are often not engaged with, and so they slip into the background.
When something is in the background, it tends to be fuzzy and
imperceptible, and we can have all sorts of incorrect assumptions about
it.

"*Aniccā* *vatta* *saṇkhāra*"---all conditioned things, all phenomena,
are impermanent---that phrase begins one of the suttas in the
Dhammapada. By making an effort to bring to mind this reflection on
uncertainty and change, we have an opportunity to brighten and clarify
the mind with the truth of impermanence, the truth of our conditioned
experience.
